LIFE OF PELOPIDAS.

I. Cato the elder, speaking to some persons who were praising a man of
reckless daring and audacity in war, observed that there is a
difference between a man's setting a high value on courage, and
setting a low value on his own life--and rightly. For a daring soldier
in the army of Antigonus, but of broken and ill health, being asked by
the king the reason of his paleness, confessed that he was suffering
from some secret disorder. When then the king, anxious for him,
charged his physicians to use the greatest care in their treatment, if
a cure were possible, at length this brave fellow, being restored to
health, was no longer fond of peril and furious in battle, so that
Antigonus reproved him, and expressed surprise at the change. The man
made no secret of his reason, but answered: "My, king, you have made
me less warlike by freeing me from those miseries on account of which
I used to hold my life cheap." And the Sybarite seems to have spoken
to the same effect about the Spartans, when he said that "they do no
great thing by dying in the wars in order to escape from such labours
and such a mode of life as theirs." However, no wonder if the
Sybarites, effete with luxurious debauchery, thought men mad who
despised death for love of honour and noble emulation; whereas the
Lacedæmonians were enabled by their valour both to live and to die
with pleasure, as the elegy shows, which runs thus:

"'Twas not that life or death itself was good,
    That these heroic spirits shed their blood:
    This was their aim, and this their latest cry,
    'Let us preserve our honour, live or die.'"

When, then, they had determined to face the enemy, and taken up a
position at Leuktra opposite to the Spartan army, Pelopidas saw a
vision in his sleep which greatly disturbed him. In the plain of
Leuktra there are the tombs of the daughters of Skedasus, whom they
call Leuktridæ because of the place of their burial; for there it was
that they were buried after they had been violated by some Spartan
strangers. When this base and impious deed was done, their father, as
he could get no satisfaction from the Lacedæmonians, invoked curses
upon the Spartan race, and slew himself at the tombs of his daughters.
Oracles and legends always had warned the Spartans to beware of the
vengeance of Leuktra, though most of them did not understand it, and
were not clear as to the place, since a small sea-side town in Laconia
is also called Leuktron, and there is a place of the same name near
Megalopolis in Arcadia, and, also, this crime was committed a long
time before the battle.

XXI. So now Pelopidas, when asleep in the camp, seemed to see the
maidens weeping over their tombs and invoking curses on the Spartans,
and Skedasus, who bade him sacrifice a red virgin to the maidens, if
he wished to conquer his enemies. And as this command seemed to him
shocking and impious, he started up and consulted the prophets and the
generals. Some of them forbade him to neglect or disobey the warning,
quoting the famous old instances of Menækeus the son of Kreon and
Makaria the daughter of Herakles, and, in later times, Pherekydes the
philosopher, who was killed by the Lacedæmonians, and whose skin,
according to some oracle, is still kept by their kings, and Leonidas,
who following the oracle did in some sort offer himself as a victim on
behalf of Greece; and futhermore they spoke of those persons whom
Themistokles sacrificed to Dionysus before the sea-fight at Salamis.
All these are verified by the success which followed them. And again,
Agesilaus when starting from the same place that Agamemnon did to
fight the same enemies, was asked by the god, during a vision at
Aulis, to give him his daughter as a sacrifice; but he did not give
her, but by his softheartedness ruined the expedition, which
ingloriously failed. Others spoke on the other side, urging that so
barbarous and impious a sacrifice could not be pleasing to any of the
powers above, for, they said, it is not the Typhons and giants of
legend that rule in heaven, but the father of all gods and men. To
believe that there are deities that delight in the blood and slaughter
of mankind is probably a foolish fancy; but if there be such, it is
our duty to disregard them and treat them as powerless, for these
strange and shocking desires can only take their origin and exist in
feeble and depraved minds.

XXII. While the chiefs of the army were engaged in this discussion,
and Pelopidas especially was at a loss what to do, a filly escaped
from some horses at pasture, and running through the ranks stopped
opposite them. They admired her coat shining with the brightest red,
and the mettled courage of her neigh, but Theokritus the prophet,
comprehending what was meant, called to Pelopidas: "Happy man! Here is
your victim; let us not expect any other virgin, but take the gift the
gods provide you." Hereupon they caught the filly and led it to the
tombs of the maidens. Here, after prayer, they hung garlands on the
tombs, and made the sacrifice with joy, explaining to the whole army
the vision of Pelopidas and their reasons for the sacrifice.

LIFE OF MARCELLUS.

I. Poseidonius tells us that Marcus Claudius, who was five times
consul of the Roman people, was the son of Marcus, and was the first
of his family to receive the name of Marcellus, which means warlike.
Indeed, by his experience he became a thorough soldier; his body was
strong, and his arm powerful. He was fond of war, and bore himself
with a lordly arrogance in battle, though otherwise he was of a quiet
and amiable disposition, fond of Greek culture and literature, to the
extent of respecting and admiring those who knew it, though he from
his want of leisure could not make such progress as he wished. For the
Roman chiefs of that period were, if any men ever were, condemned, in
the words of Homer,

"From youth to age, disastrous wars to wage."[12]

In their youth they fought the Carthaginians on the Sicilian coast; in
middle age they fought the Gauls in defence of Italy itself; when
advanced in years they again contended with Hannibal and the
Carthaginians, not, as common men do, obtaining any relief from
constant service because of their old age, but ever urged by their
courage and nobility of soul to accept the command in new campaigns.

II. Marcellus was practised in all forms of battle, but was especially
skilful in single combat, so that he never declined any man's
challenge, and slew all who challenged him. In Sicily he saved the
life of his brother Otacilius when in great peril, by holding his
shield over him and killing his assailants. For this conduct, young as
he was, he received crowns[13] and rewards from the generals, and as
he grew in reputation was elected _curule ædile_ by the people, and
augur by the priests. This is a kind of priestly office, to which the
law especially assigns the observance of auguries drawn from the
flight of birds. During his tenure of the office of ædile, he was
obliged, much against his will, to commence a law-suit. He had a son
of his own name, in the bloom of youth, of great beauty, and equally
with it admired by his countrymen for his modesty and education.
Capitolinus, Marcellus's colleague, a licentious and reckless man,
made disgraceful proposals to this lad. He first repelled his attacks
alone, but on a second attempt told his father, and Marcellus, being
much enraged, summoned the man before the Senate. He attempted many
quibbles and subterfuges, and appealed to the tribunes of the people
to support him, but as they refused his application he betook himself
to pleading denial of the charge. There being no witnesses of what he
had said, the Senate decided to send for the boy, and when they saw
how he blushed and wept with a modesty mingled with unquenchable rage,
they, without requiring any other proof, found Capitolinus guilty, and
condemned him to pay a fine, with which Marcellus had silver libation
vessels made, and consecrated them to the gods.

III. After twenty-two years the first Punic War came to an end, and
the Romans turned their attention to Gaulish troubles. The Insubrians,
a Celtic tribe dwelling in Italy at the foot of the Alps, powerful by
themselves, were collecting other forces, and enrolling all those
Gauls who fought for hire, called Gæsatæ.

It was a wonderful and fortunate circumstance that this Celtic war did
not break out at the same time as that with Carthage, but that the
Gauls, like the gladiator who waits to fight with the survivor of a
pair of combatants, had remained quiet during the whole of that war,
and now stepped forward and challenged the victors when they were at
leisure. Yet the war caused much terror, because it would take place
on their own frontier against their neighbour states, and because of
the ancient reputation of the Gauls, whom the Romans seem to fear more
than any other nation. They once lost their city at their hands, and
afterwards passed a law that the priests should be exempt from all
military service, except in case of another war with Gaul. Their alarm
was shown both by their preparations (for it is said that never before
or since were there so many thousand Romans under arms), and by their
extraordinary sacrifices. For though they never observe the barbarous
ceremonies of foreigners, but as far as possible are humane and like
the Greeks in their religion, on the outbreak of this war they were
compelled to follow certain prophecies in the Sibylline books, and
bury alive two Greeks, a man and a woman, and likewise two Gauls, in
the place called the Cattle Market: and in accordance with these
prophecies they still up to this day in the month of November perform
religious mysteries, which may not be seen or spoken of by either
Greeks or Gauls.

IV. At the beginning of the war the Romans were some times victorious
and sometimes defeated, without coming to any decisive action, until
the consulate of Flaminius and Furius, who led a great army against
the Insubrians. Then the river that passes through Picenum ran blood,
and it was said that three moons were seen at the city of Ariminum,
and the augurs, who watch the omens at the consular elections,
declared that the appointment of these consuls was wrong and of evil
omen for the people. Hereupon the Senate immediately sent despatches
to the camp recalling the consuls, that they might as soon as possible
return and lay down their office and so undertake nothing as consuls
against the enemy. Flaminius, when he received these despatches, did
not open them before he had routed the barbarians in battle and
overrun their country. So when he returned to Rome loaded with spoil,
the people did not go out to meet him, but, because he had not at once
obeyed his orders, and had treated them with insolent contempt, very
nearly refused him his triumph, and after the triumph reduced him to a
private station, forcing both him and his colleague to give up their
office. So much regard had the Romans for religion, that they would
not on occasions of the greatest good fortune overlook any neglect of
the prophecies and customs of their ancestors, holding it more
important for the safety of the state that their generals should
reverence the gods than that they should conquer the enemy.

V. As an example of this, Tiberius Sempronius, a man second to no one
in Rome for courage and virtue, named as his successors when consul
Scipio Nasica and Caius Marcius, and when they were actually in
possession of their provinces and armies he happened to consult a book
of sacred ritual, and found in it an old custom which he did not know
before. It was to this effect. When a consul has hired a house or tent
outside the city to watch the flight of birds, if he be obliged before
any certain omen appears, to return to the city for what cause soever,
he must give up the place which he hired and take another, and make
his observation over again from the beginning. This, it seems,
Tiberius did not know, and it was after using the same place twice
that he named these men consuls. Afterwards, having discovered his
error, he laid the matter before the Senate; and that body did not
despise this apparently slight irregularity, but sent despatches to
the men, who at once left their provinces, returned to Rome, and
resigned their office. Now this happened in later times; but in the
very times of which we write two men of the best family were deprived
of the priesthood: Cornelius Cethegus, because he handled the entrails
improperly at a sacrifice, and Quintus Sulpicius, because when he was
sacrificing, the crested hat which he wore as flamen, fell off his
head. And because, when Minucius the dictator was appointing Caius
Flaminius his master of the knights, the mouse which is called the
coffin-mouse was heard to squeak, they turned them out of their
office, and elected others. But, though so elaborately careful in
trifles, they never admitted any superstitious observance, and neither
altered nor added anything to their ancestral ritual.

VI. When Flaminius and his colleague had resigned their offices,
Marcellus was designated consul by the interreges.[14] On entering
upon his office he nominated Cnæus Cornelius as his colleague. It was
said that the Gauls were offering terms of reconciliation, and that
the Senate wished for peace with them, but that Marcellus raised the
spirit of the people and excited them to continue the war. But still a
peace was concluded; and it seems to have been the Gæsatæ who renewed
the war, by crossing the Alps and stirring up the Insubrians. Thirty
thousand in number, they joined that tribe, which was many times
larger, and in high spirits at once attacked Acerræ, a city beyond the
river Po. From that place Britomartus with ten thousand Gæsatæ
proceeded to plunder the country near the Po.

Marcellus hearing this left his colleague before Acerræ with the
infantry, heavy baggage, and one-third of the cavalry, and himself,
with the rest of the cavalry and about six hundred of the most active
foot soldiers, marched night and day till he fell in with the ten
thousand Gæsatæ at Clastidium, a Gaulish village which not long before
had been subject to the Romans. There was no time for rest or
refreshment; for his arrival was at once perceived by the enemy, and
his force despised, as he had so little infantry with him, for the
Celts thought nothing of his cavalry. Admirable horsemen and proud of
their superior skill, they also had greatly the advantage of Marcellus
in numbers, and at once, their king riding foremost, charged the
Romans with great impetuosity and terrible threats, expecting to sweep
them away. Marcellus, fearing that they might surround and outflank
his small body, spread out his cavalry, thinning and widening his
line, until he presented a front nearly equal to that of the enemy. He
was now advancing to the charge, when his horse, scared at the
terrible display of the enemy, turned short round, and forcibly
carried him back. Marcellus, fearing that this might cause
superstitious terror to the Romans, hastily wheeled his horse round on
the bridle hand, and having again directed him against the enemy, paid
his adorations to the sun, as though he had made this circle not by
chance, but of set purpose; for the Romans have this custom, of
turning round to worship the gods, and so he, as he was on the point
of joining battle, vowed that he would consecrate the finest of the
enemies' arms to Jupiter Feretrius.

Having slain the greater part of them, and collected their arms and
stores, he returned to his colleague, who was with difficulty holding
his own against the Celts before the walls of the largest and most
populous of Gaulish cities. It is called Mediolanum, and is regarded
by the Cisalpine Gauls as their metropolis: consequently they fought
vigorously in its defence, and more besieged Cornelius than were
besieged by him. But when Marcellus arrived, the Gæsatæ, as soon as
they heard of the defeat and death of their king, went home.
Mediolanum fell, and the Celts of their own accord surrendered the
other cities, and threw themselves upon the mercy of the Romans. They
received moderate terms of peace.

VIII. By a decree of the Senate Marcellus alone triumphed. His
procession was glorious, as few others have been, with the splendour
and value of the booty exhibited, and the great stature of the
captives; but the strangest and most interesting sight of all was the
general himself, as he appeared carrying the suit of armour of the
Gaul to offer it to the god. He had cut and trimmed the trunk of a
tall young oak tree, and had tied and hung the spoils upon it, each
put in its proper place. When the procession began, he himself mounted
his chariot and four, and carried in state through the city, this the
most glorious of all his trophies of victory. The army marched after
him with their finest armour, singing as they went songs and pæans of
victory in honour of the gods and their leader. Thus he proceeded till
he reached the temple of Jupiter Feretrius. Here he dismounted, and
dedicated his spoils, being the third, and, up to our day, the last
who ever did so: first comes Romulus, with the spoils of Acron of
Cæninum; second, Cornelius Cossus offered the spoils of Tolumnius the
Etruscan; third, Marcellus offered these spoils of Britomartus, the
king of the Gauls; after Marcellus, no man.

The god to whom they are offered is called Jupiter Feretrius,
according to some, from the trophy being carried upon a _feretrum_, or
bier, as it is called in the Greek tongue, which then was much mixed
with the Latin; but according to others, it is an attribute of Jupiter
the Thunderer, for the Romans call striking _ferire_. Others say that
the name comes from striking the enemy; for even now in battle when
they are pursuing the enemy they keep shouting, "_Feri_," that is,
"Strike," to one another. The word for ordinary spoils is _spolia_,
but for these _spolia opima_. Yet it is said that Numa Pompilius
speaks of first, second, and third degrees of _spolia opima_, ordering
the first to be offered to Jupiter Feretrius, the second to Mars, and
the third to Quirinus; and that for the first the prize is three
hundred ases, two hundred for the second, and one hundred for the
third. But the most common story runs that those spoils alone are
_spolia opima_ which are taken at a pitched battle, and first of all,
and by the general of the one side from the general of the other. But
of these things enough.

The Roman people were so overjoyed at that victory and the end of the
war that they made from the money paid to ransom captives, a golden
statue, and sent it to Apollo at Delphi as a thank-offering, and gave
a magnificent share of the booty to their allies, and even sent many
presents to Hiero the king of Syracuse, their friend and ally.

IX. When Hannibal invaded Italy, Marcellus was sent with an army to
Sicily: but when the disaster at Cannæ took place, where many thousand
Romans perished, and only a few fugitives collected at Canusium, it
was expected that Hannibal would at once march to attack Rome, as he
had cut off the greater part of the army. Marcellus at once sent a
garrison of fifteen hundred men to guard the city, and afterwards, in
obedience to a senatus-consultum, went to Canusium, and taking command
of the fugitives collected there, led them out of their fortified
camp, to show that he would not deliver up the country to the enemy.
The Romans had lost many of their most capable leaders in the wars,
and Fabius Maximus, who had the greatest reputation, was blamed by
them for sloth and want of enterprise because of his excessive caution
in avoiding a defeat. Thinking, therefore, that he was an excellent
general for defence, not for attack, they cast their eyes upon
Marcellus, and in order to combine his vigour and daring with the
cautious and far-seeing tactics of the other, they at one time elected
them both consuls, at another made the one consul with the other
serving as proconsul. Poseidonius tells us that Fabius was called the
shield of the state, and Marcellus the sword. And Hannibal himself
said that he feared Fabius as a schoolmaster, but regarded Marcellus
as an antagonist, for the former prevented his doing any mischief,
while the latter might make him suffer some.

X. At first Hannibal's soldiers, elated with their victory, roamed
with careless confidence out of their camp and plundered the country;
where Marcellus fell upon them, and by a series of defeats
considerably weakened them. Next, he went to Naples and Nola. At
Naples he encouraged the citizens, who of their own accord wished
well to the Roman cause; but at Nola he found the city in a state of
faction, as the senate were unable to restrain the populace, who
favoured Hannibal. There was one Bandius, a man of the first nobility
of the city, and renowned for bravery. This man had fought at Cannæ
with conspicuous valour, and had slain many Carthaginians. When after
the battle he was found in a heap of slain with his body pierced with
darts, Hannibal, in admiration of his courage, not only dismissed him
without ransom, but gave him presents and made him a personal friend.
Bandius, out of gratitude, was one of the most eager partisans of
Hannibal, and, having great influence with the people, was urging them
to revolt. Marcellus thought that it would be a crime to put to death
a man of such glorious antecedents, and who had taken part in one of
the greatest struggles of the Romans; and, besides his natural
kindliness, being able by his conversation to win over any man of
noble nature, he on one occasion when greeted by Bandius inquired who
he might be, though he knew very well, but merely wanted a pretext and
opportunity for conversation with him. For, when he answered, "Lucius
Bandius," Marcellus, as though surprised and pleased, said, "Are you
indeed that Bandius, of whom all those who fought at Cannæ told us at
Rome, the only man who did not desert Paulus Æmilius the consul, but
who received upon his own body the greater part of the darts which
were aimed at him?" Bandius admitted that he was the man, and
endeavoured to speak lightly of his wounds, but Marcellus went on:
"Then, as you bear about you such marks of your devotion to our cause,
why did you not at once come to me? Do you think us slow to requite
the valour of our friends, when it is honoured even by the enemy."
Having spoken to him thus courteously, he embraced him, and presented
him with a war-horse and five hundred silver drachmas.

XI. After this Bandius became the firmest partisan and ally of
Marcellus, and a terrible denouncer and assailant of the opposite
party. This was a numerous one; and their design was, when the Romans
should march out of the town against the enemy, to attack their
baggage. Marcellus, therefore, having marshalled his troops within
the city, brought the baggage to the gates, and by proclamation
forbade the people of Nola to approach the walls. Thus no force was
visible, and he induced Hannibal to march up to the city in disorderly
array, as he supposed that within it all was confusion. Then Marcellus
ordered the gate nearest him to be thrown open, and with the best
equipped of his cavalry charged out of it and fell upon the enemy hand
to hand. Presently the infantry poured out of another gate, running
with loud shouts; and while Hannibal was dividing his forces to deal
with them a third gate opened, and from it issued the remainder of the
army, and from all sides attacked the Carthaginians, who were
bewildered at the unexpectedness of the attack, and fought without
spirit against their immediate assailants, because of the others who
they saw would soon beset them.

There first did Hannibal's troops give way before the Romans, and were
chased with great loss into their camp. It is said that more than five
thousand perished, and that no more than five hundred Romans fell. But
Livy does not consider that a great defeat took place, or that so many
of the enemy fell, but he points out that Marcellus gained much glory
by that battle, and that the Roman people took courage after their
misfortunes, thinking that it was not against an unconquerable and
invulnerable foe that they were fighting, but one who could be made to
suffer as well as themselves.

XII. For this reason, as one of the consuls was dead, the people
called for Marcellus, though he was absent, to become his successor;
and in spite of the efforts of the government they put off the day of
election until he came to Rome from the army. He was elected consul by
the votes of all the tribes, but it thundered at the time, and as the
priests declared this an unpropitious omen, but did not dare openly to
oppose his election for fear of the people, he himself voluntarily
resigned his office. But he did not avoid military service, but was
created proconsul, and returning to Nola and his army he harassed
those who had chosen the side of Hannibal. When the latter hastily
marched to the assistance of his friends, and offered to fight a
pitched battle with Marcellus, he declined; but subsequently, when the
greater part of the Carthaginian army was scattered in search of
plunder, and no longer expecting an attack, he fell upon it. He had
distributed long lances, such as are used on ship-board, among his
infantry, and instructed them to watch their opportunity and hurl
these from a distance at the Carthaginians, who had no javelin-men,
and whose heavy spears were only used to thrust with at close
quarters. In consequence, it seems, of this, all who engaged with the
Romans that day turned their backs and shamefully fled, losing five
thousand killed, six hundred prisoners; while of their elephants, four
were killed and two taken alive. And, what was of the greatest
importance of all, on the third day after the above battle, three
hundred Spanish and Numidian cavalry deserted to the Romans, a thing
which never had happened to Hannibal before, as, although his army was
composed of so many different nations, he had been able for a very
long time to inspire it with the same spirit. These men faithfully
served Marcellus and the generals who succeeded him.

XIII. Marcellus, when elected consul for the third time, sailed to
Sicily; for Hannibal's successes in the war had encouraged the
Carthaginians to recover that island, especially as Syracusan politics
were in a disturbed state in consequence of the death of the despot
Hieronymus; and on this account a Roman army under Appius had already
been sent there. When Marcellus had taken the command of this army, he
received a large accession of Roman soldiers, whose misfortune was as
follows. Of the troops who fought with Hannibal at Cannæ, some fled,
and some were taken alive, in such numbers that the Romans scarcely
thought that they had left sufficient citizens to man the city walls,
but this remnant was so full of pride and so great of soul, that,
though Hannibal offered to release the captives for a small ransom,
they would not take them, but refused by a decree of the Senate, and
endured to see some of them put to death, and others sold out of Italy
as slaves. The mass of those who had saved themselves by flight they
sent to Sicily, with orders not to set foot on the soil of Italy until
the war with Hannibal was over. So when Marcellus went to Sicily,
these men came in a body into his presence, and falling on the ground
before him besought him to permit them to serve as honourable
soldiers, promising with cries and tears that they would prove by
their actions that it was more by their bad fortune than their
cowardice that the defeat at Cannæ took place. Marcellus was touched
with compassion, and wrote to the Senate asking to be allowed to fill
up from these men the vacancies which would occur in the ranks of his
army. Much discussion followed; and at last the Senate decreed that
Rome did not require the services of cowardly citizens, but, if
Marcellus nevertheless wished to make use of them, they must not
receive any of the crowns and other rewards which are commonly
bestowed by generals as the prizes of valour. This decree vexed
Marcellus, and after the war in Sicily he returned to Rome and blamed
the Senate that, in spite of all that he had done for them, they would
not allow him to relieve so many citizens from such a miserable
position.

XIV. In Sicily, at this time, he had just cause of complaint against
Hippokrates the Syracusan general, who, favouring the Carthaginian
side, and wishing to establish himself as despot, put to death many
Romans at Leontini. Marcellus took Leontini by storm, and did no harm
to the inhabitants, but flogged and executed all the deserters whom he
found. Hippokrates first sent to Syracuse a story that Marcellus was
exterminating the people of Leontini, and when this report had thrown
the city into confusion he fell upon it and made himself master of it.
Marcellus hereupon proceeded to Syracuse with his whole army, and
encamping near the city sent ambassadors to tell them what had really
happened in Leontini. By this, however, he gained nothing, as the
Syracusans would not listen to him (for the party of Hippokrates was
in the ascendant). He now attacked the city both by sea and land,
Appius commanding the land forces, while Marcellus directed a fleet of
sixty quinqueremes[15] full of armed men and missile weapons. He
raised a vast engine upon a raft made by lashing eight ships together,
and sailed with it to attack the wall, trusting to the numbers and
excellence of his siege engines, and to his own personal prestige.
But Archimedes and his machines cared nothing for this, though he did
not speak of any of these engines as being constructed by serious
labour, but as the mere holiday sports of a geometrician. He would not
indeed have constructed them but at the earnest request of King Hiero,
who entreated him to leave the abstract for the concrete, and to bring
his ideas within the comprehension of the people by embodying them in
tangible forms.

Marcellus was especially grieved at the fate of Archimedes. He was
studying something by himself upon a figure which he had drawn, to
which he had so utterly given up his thoughts and his sight that he
did not notice the assault of the Romans and the capture of the city,
and when a soldier suddenly appeared before him and ordered him to
follow him into the presence of Marcellus, he refused to do so before
he had finished his problem and its solution. The man hereupon in a
rage drew his sword and killed him. Others say that the Roman fell
upon him at once with a sword to kill him, but he, seeing him, begged
him to wait for a little while, that he might not leave his theorem
imperfect, and that while he was reflecting upon it, he was slain. A
third story is that as he was carrying into Marcellus's presence his
mathematical instruments, sundials, spheres, and quadrants, by which
the eye might measure the magnitude of the sun, some soldiers met with
him, and supposing that there was gold in the boxes, slew him. But all
agree that Marcellus was much grieved, that he turned away from his
murderer as though he were an object of abhorrence to gods and men,
and that he sought out his family and treated them well.

XX. The Romans up to this time had given foreign nations great proofs
of their skill in war and their courage in battle, but had not shown
any evidences of kindness of heart, clemency, or any social virtue.
Marcellus seems to have been the first who exhibited the Romans in a
more amiable light to the Greeks. For he so dealt with his
adversaries, and treated so many individuals and cities with kindness
that even if any harsh treatment did befall Enna, or Megara, or
Syracuse, it was thought to be more by the fault of the vanquished
than of the victors. I will mention one instance out of many. There is
a city in Sicily called Engyion, of no great size, but very ancient,
and renowned for the appearance there of the goddesses called
'Mothers.' The foundation of the temple is ascribed to the Cretans,
and they used to show certain lances and helmets inscribed, some with
the name of Meriones, some of Ulixes, that is, Odysseus, which were
dedicated to these goddesses. This city was eager to espouse the
Carthaginian side, but was prevailed upon by one Nikias, the leading
man of the city, to join the Romans, by freely speaking his mind in
the public assembly and proving that his opponents did not consult the
true interests of the state. These men, fearing his power and high
reputation, determined to kidnap him, and deliver him up to the
Carthaginians. Nikias, discovering this plot, quietly took measures
for his own security, but publicly made unseemly speeches about the
"Mothers," and spoke of the received tradition of their appearance
with doubt and contempt, to the delight of his enemies, as he seemed
to be by these actions justifying the treatment which they meant to
inflict upon him. When all their preparations for seizing him were
complete there was a public assembly of the citizens, and Nikias, in
the midst of a speech upon state policy, suddenly fell to the ground,
and after a short time, as all men were, naturally, silent with
surprise, he raised his head, and turning it round he began to speak
in deep and trembling tones, which he gradually made shriller and more
intense, until, seeing the whole theatre, where the meeting was,
silent with horror, he threw off his cloak, tore his tunic, and, half
naked, rushed to the gate of the theatre, crying out that he was
pursued by the "Mothers." As no one dared to touch or stop him, from
fear of the gods, but all made way for him, he passed out of the city
gate, not omitting any of the cries and trembling of body of a person
under demoniacal possession. His wife, who was in the secret, and her
husband's confederate, first brought her children and prostrated
herself as a suppliant before the goddesses, and then under pretence
of seeking her wandering husband managed to leave the city without
opposition. Thus they safely reached Marcellus at Syracuse; and when,
after enduring many affronts and insolent proceeding from the people
of Engyion Marcellus took them all prisoners, and imprisoned them,
meaning to put them all to death, Nikias at first stood by weeping,
but at length, embracing Marcellus as a suppliant, he begged for the
lives of his countrymen, beginning with his own personal enemies,
until he relented, and set them all at liberty. Nor did he touch their
city, but gave Nikias ample lands and rich presents. This story is
told by Poseidonius the philosopher.

XXI. When the Romans recalled Marcellus, to conduct the war in their
own country, he removed most of the beautiful ornaments of the city of
Syracuse, to be admired at his triumphal procession, and to adorn
Rome. For at that time Rome neither possessed nor knew of any works of
art, nor had she any delicacy of taste in such matters. Filled with
the blood-stained arms and spoils of barbarians, and crowded with
trophies of war and memorials of triumphs, she was no pleasant or
delightful spectacle, fit to feed the eyes of unwarlike and luxurious
spectators, but, as Epameinondas called the plain of Bœotia "the Stage
of Ares," and Xenophon called Ephesus "the Workshop of War," so, in my
opinion, you might call Rome at that time, in the words of Pindar,
"the Domain of Ares, who revels in war." Wherefore Marcellus gained
the greater credit with the vulgar, because he enriched the city with
statues possessing the Hellenic grace and truth to nature, while
Fabius Maximus was more esteemed by the elders. He neither touched nor
removed anything of the kind from the city of Tarentum, which he took,
but carried off all the money and other property, and let the statues
remain, quoting the proverb: "Let us," said he, "leave the Tarentines
their angry gods." They blamed Marcellus's proceedings as being
invidious for Rome, because he had led not only men, but also gods as
captives in his triumph, and also because the people, who before this
were accustomed either to fight or to till the ground, and were
ignorant of luxury and indolent pleasures, like the Herakles of
Euripides,

XXII. Marcellus, whose enemies opposed his claim to a triumph, on the
ground that the campaign in Sicily was not completely finished, and
that he did not deserve a third triumph, so far gave way as to lead
the greater triumphal procession as far as the Alban Mount, and only
to enter the city in the lesser form which the Greeks call _euan_, and
the Romans an _ovation_. The general conducts this, not, as in the
triumph, riding in a chariot and four with a crown of laurel, and with
trumpets sounding before him, but walking on foot in low shoes
surrounded by flute players, and crowned with myrtle, so as to look
unwarlike and joyous rather than terrible. And this is a great proof
to me that in old times it was the manner and not the importance of
the things achieved that settled the form of triumph. Those generals
who had gained their point by battle and slaughter probably made their
entry in that martial and terrible fashion, having, as is customary in
lustrations of armies, crowned the men and wreathed their arms with
abundance of laurel: whereas the generals who without an appeal to
arms had settled matters satisfactorily by negotiation and persuasive
eloquence, were given by custom this peaceful and festive entry into
the city. For the flute is a peaceful instrument, and the myrtle is
the favorite plant of Aphrodite, who above all the gods hates violence
and war. This form of triumph is called ovation, not from the cry of
"Evan," as most people think, for the other also is accompanied with
shouts and songs, but the word had been twisted by the Greeks into one
that has a meaning in their language, and also they are convinced that
some honour is paid to Dionysus in this ceremony, which God we name
Evius and Thriambos. It is curious to observe that the great Laconian
lawgiver arranged the sacrifices differently to those of Rome. In
Sparta those ex-generals who have accomplished their purpose by
persuasion or fraud sacrifice an ox, while those who have done it by
battle offer a cock. For, though warlike to excess, they thought that
a victory gained by clever negotiation was greater and more befitting
human beings than one gained by force and courage. Which is to be
preferred, I leave to my readers' consideration.

XXIII. When Marcellus entered upon his fourth consulship, his enemies
induced the Syracusans to send a deputation to Rome, to complain
loudly to the Senate of the cruel and unjust treatment which they had
received from him. Marcellus chanced to be performing some sacrifice
in the Capitol; so when the Syracusans came to the assembled Senate,
begging for a hearing that justice might be done them, the other
consul stopped them, feeling that Marcellus ought not to be attacked
in his absence. But Marcellus as soon as he heard of it, came to the
Senate-house, seated himself as consul, on the curule chair, and
despatched business; then, when this was finished, he came down and
placed himself as a private person in the place where men on their
trial usually stood, and called on the Syracusans to prove their
charges against him. They were abashed at his majestic confidence of
demeanour, and he who had been invincible in arms seemed to them yet
more terrible and unapproachable in his consular purple. Nevertheless,
encouraged by the enemies of Marcellus, they began their impeachment,
and pleaded their cause in a piteous fashion, their chief point being
that they, who were friends and allies of the Romans, had been treated
in a way in which many other generals had forborne to treat hostile
cities. Marcellus answered that they had done the Romans much harm,
for which they had received no punishment, except such as could not be
prevented in war, because victorious soldiers cannot be restrained
from sacking a town which they have won, and their city, he said, was
taken because they had refused his frequent offers of terms of
agreement. They could not urge that they had been forced into war by
their despots, for they had themselves chosen those very despots with
the intention of going to war. After both parties had been heard, the
Syracusans, according to custom, left the Senate-house. Marcellus came
out with them, leaving his colleague to preside over the assembly, and
stood outside the doors, without altering his usual demeanour, either
from fear of the result or anger against the Syracusans, but serenely
awaiting the verdict of the Senate.

When the question was voted upon, and he was announced successful, the
Syracusans prostrated themselves before him, beseeching him with
tears to put away his anger against themselves, and to show pity on
the city, which was sensible to kindness, and would be grateful to
him. Marcellus was touched by their appeal; he became reconciled to
them, and was a constant benefactor to their city. He restored them
their freedom, their laws, and what remained of their property, and
the Senate confirmed his acts. In return for this, besides many other
honours they passed a law that whenever Marcellus or any of his
descendants should land in Sicily, the Syracusans should wear garlands
of flowers and hold a festival with sacrifices to the gods.

XXIV. Next he proceeded against Hannibal; and whereas nearly all the
other consuls and generals, after the disaster at Cannæ had thought of
nothing but avoiding battles with him, and no one had dared to measure
himself with him in the field, he adopted the opposite course, arguing
that while they fancied that they were wearing out Hannibal's army
they did not perceive that Italy was being consumed by it. Fabius, he
urged, thought too much of safety, and by his policy of waiting, Rome,
already drooping under its burdens, would at the end of the war perish
as well as Hannibal. He was, he said, like those timid surgeons who
shrink from using decisive remedies, and who mistake the sinking
strength of the patient for the abatement of disease. His first act
was to take some important Samnite towns which had revolted. Here he
found great stores of corn and money, and took three thousand of
Hannibal's soldiers who were there as garrison. Next, when Hannibal
defeated and killed Cnæus Fulvius, the proconsul in Apulia, with a
loss of eleven military tribunes and the greater part of his army,
Marcellus sent despatches to Rome, bidding the citizens be of good
courage, for he was already on the march, and would abate Hannibal's
exultation. Livy tells us that these despatches when read did not
diminish the grief of the Romans, but added to their fear, as they
reflected that the risk they were about to run was so much more
serious than the defeat they had sustained, as Marcellus was superior
to Fulvius.

According to his despatch, he instantly marched against Hannibal into
Lucania, and finding him entrenched on some strong hills near the city
of Numistro, he himself encamped in the plain. On the following day he
was the first to draw out his army in battle array. Hannibal descended
from his position, and fought a great and well-contested battle, for
it began at the third hour, and was scarcely over by dark, but without
any decisive result. At daybreak he again led out his army and defied
Hannibal to fight. But Hannibal retired; and Marcellus, after
stripping the corpses of the enemy, and burying his own dead, pursued.
His skill and good fortune were greatly admired in this campaign, as
he did not fall into any of the numerous ambuscades which were
prepared for him by Hannibal, and in all his skirmishes came off
victorious. For this reason, as the comitia were impending, the Senate
thought that it would be better to call the other consul away from
Sicily than to recall Marcellus just as he was thoroughly engaged with
Hannibal. When the other consul arrived, they bade him name Quintus
Fulvius dictator. For a dictator is not chosen by the people or by the
Senate, but one of the consuls or prætors comes forward publicly and
names whom he pleases dictator. And this is the reason that the man so
named is called dictator; for _dicere_ in Latin means to _name_. But
some think that the dictator is so called because he does not require
any vote or show of hands, but on his own responsibility dictates his
orders; indeed, the orders of magistrates which are called by the
Greeks _diatagmata_, are called _edicts_ by the Romans.

XXV. When Marcellus's colleague came to Rome from Sicily, he wished to
name another person dictator, and, that he might not be forced to act
against his inclination, he sailed away by night back to Sicily. Under
these circumstances the people nominated Quintus Fulvius dictator, and
the Senate wrote to Marcellus bidding him vote for this person. He did
so, confirming the choice of the people, and was himself elected
proconsul for the following year. After a conference with Fabius
Maximus, at which it was arranged that the latter should make an
attempt on Tarentum, while Marcellus should constantly engage Hannibal
and so prevent his affording the town any assistance, he set out, and
came upon Hannibal near Canusium. Hannibal frequently shifted his
camp, and tried to avoid a battle, but Marcellus was not to be shaken
off, and at length attacked his position, and by skirmishing provoked
him to fight. Marcellus sustained his attack, and the battle was put
an end to by night. Next morning his troops were again beheld under
arms, so that Hannibal in great anxiety called together the
Carthaginians and besought them to fight as they had never done
before. "You see," said he, "that even after our great victories, we
cannot rest in peace, unless we drive away this fellow." The armies
met; and Marcellus seems to have lost the day by an unseasonable
manœuvre. His right wing was suffering, and he ordered up one of the
legions to support it; but this change produced confusion in the
ranks, and gave the victory to the enemy, with a loss of two thousand
seven hundred men to the Romans. Marcellus, after retiring to his
fortified camp, called together his soldiers, and reproached them,
saying that he saw before him the arms and bodies of many Romans, but
not one true Roman. They begged forgiveness, but he answered that he
could not forgive them when defeated, but would forgive them if
victorious. On the morrow he said that he would renew the battle, in
order that the Romans might hear of their victory before they heard of
their defeat. After these words he gave orders that the troops which
had given way should be supplied with rations of barley instead of
corn; which had such an effect upon them, that although many were
suffering from the hurts in the battle, yet, there was not one who did
not suffer more from the reproaches of Marcellus than from his wounds.

XXVI. At daybreak the scarlet robe, the well known signal of battle,
was displayed from the general's tent. The disgraced troops, at their
own request, were placed in the first rank; the rest of the army
followed under their officers. Hannibal hearing of this exclaimed:
"Hercules! What can one do with a man who knows not how to bear either
good or bad fortune. This is the only general who, when victorious
allows his foe no rest, and when defeated takes none himself. We shall
always, it seems, have to be fighting this man, who is equally excited
to attack by his confidence when victor, and his shame when
vanquished."

In the battle the men on each side were fighting on equal terms, when
Hannibal ordered his elephants to be brought into the front rank and
to attack the Roman lines. Great tumult and disturbance was produced
by this, but one of the tribunes, by name Flavius, seizing a standard,
stood his ground, and struck the first elephant with the spiked end of
the staff, till he forced him to turn back. He then attacked the next
one, and those that followed. Marcellus, seeing this, ordered his
cavalry to ride as fast as they could to the scene of the confusion
and complete the rout of the enemy. They charged briskly and pursued
the flying Carthaginians, cutting them down up to their very camp.
Great havoc was wrought by the wounded elephants among them; and in
all, over eight thousand are said to have perished. Of the Roman force
three thousand were killed, and almost all the survivors were wounded,
which circumstance enabled Hannibal to leave his camp by night
unmolested, and remove himself from the neighbourhood of Marcellus;
for Marcellus could not pursue, because of the number of wounded, but
marched in a leisurely manner towards Campania, and passed the summer
at Sinuessa, recruiting the health of his soldiers.

XXVII. Hannibal, after he had thus torn himself free from Marcellus,
sent his army to plunder Italy as recklessly as though it were
disbanded; and in Rome Marcellus was ill spoken of. His enemies
induced Publius Bibulus, a clever and violent partisan, to attack him.
This man frequently addressed assemblies of the people and urged them
to transfer the command to another general, since "Marcellus," he
said, "after a little sparring with the enemy had gone to the hot
baths to refresh himself as if after a gymnastic contest." Marcellus,
hearing of this, left the army in charge of his legates, and went to
Rome to clear his reputation from these slanders; but, in consequence
of them he found that he was to undergo a trial. A day was fixed; the
people assembled in the Circus Flaminius; Bibulus rose and impeached
him. Marcellus spoke shortly and simply in his own defence, but the
highest and noblest citizens spoke at great length in his praise,
calling on the people not to show themselves by their vote worse
judges of war than Hannibal, who was always as eager to avoid fighting
with Marcellus, as he was to fight with other generals. After these
speeches had been delivered the accuser was proved to be so far wrong
in his impeachment, that Marcellus was not only honourably acquitted,
but actually elected consul for the fifth time.

XXVIII. On assuming his office, he first put down an insurrectionary
movement in Etruria, by visiting the various towns and using
conciliatory language; after this, he wished to consecrate a temple,
which he had built out of the spoils of Sicily, to Glory and Valour,
but being prevented by the priests on the ground that two gods could
not be included in one temple, he began to build another one, being
very much vexed at the opposition he encountered, but influenced by
omens: for he was disturbed at this time by many portentous
occurrences, such as several temples being struck by lightning, and
the gold in the temple of Jupiter being gnawed by the mice. It was
also reported that an ox had spoken with a human voice, and that a
child had been born with the head of an elephant--so the priests kept
him in Rome to conduct the expiatory rites and atonements for these,
though he was fretting and eager to take the field; for no man ever
was so passionately desirous of anything as he was to measure himself
with Hannibal in battle. His one dream by night, his only talk to his
friends and colleagues, his sole prayer to the gods was that he might
meet Hannibal in a fair field. I believe that he would most willingly
have enclosed both armies within a wall or palisade, and there have
fought out the quarrel. Had it not been that he was now loaded with
honours, and had given proofs of his superiority in wisdom and conduct
to any other general, men would have said that he showed a more boyish
ambition than befitted a man of his age; for he was over sixty years
old when he entered upon his fifth consulship.

XXIX. However, when he had completed the necessary sacrifices and
purifications enjoined by the soothsayers, he took the field with his
colleague, and harassed Hannibal much in the country between the towns
of Bantia and Venusia. Hannibal declined battle, but, learning that a
force was detached from the Roman army to attack the Epizephyrian
Lokrians, he laid an ambuscade on the mountain near Petelia, and
defeated them with a loss of two thousand five hundred men. This
excited Marcellus, and he led his forces nearer to those of Hannibal.
There was between the two camps a hill of some strength as a military
post, overgrown with wood. Its sloping sides afforded a view of either
camp, and upon them appeared the sources of several mountain streams.

"Not fire, not walls of iron can hinder fate,"

as Pindar says. Marcellus rode forth with his colleague Crispinus and
his son, who was military tribune, in all two hundred and twenty
horsemen. Of these none were Romans; they were Etruscans, with the
exception of twenty men from Fregellæ, who had given constant proofs
of their courage and devotion to Marcellus. On the overhanging crest
of the woody hill, a man, unseen by the Romans, was watching their
army. He signalled to the men in ambush what was going on, so that
they permitted Marcellus to ride close to them, and then suddenly
burst out upon him, and surrounding his little force on all sides,
struck and threw their darts, pursued such as ran away, and fought
with those who stood their ground. These were the twenty Fregellans.
The Etruscans at the outset ran away panic-stricken; but these men
forming together defended the consuls until Crispinus, struck by two
darts, galloped away, and Marcellus was pierced through the side with
a lance. Then even the few survivors of the Fregellans left him lying
there, and snatching up his son, who was wounded, made their way back
to the camp. The loss amounted to little over forty killed, and five
lictors and eighteen horsemen taken. Crispinus, after a few days, died
of his wounds. Such a misfortune as this, losing both consuls in one
battle, never before befel the Romans.

XXX. Hannibal heard of the fate of all the rest with indifference, but
when he was told that Marcellus had fallen he himself hastened to the
place, and stood for a long time beside the corpse, admiring its
strength and beauty. He made no boastful speech, and showed no joy in
his countenance, as a man who had slain a troublesome and dangerous
enemy, but, wondering at the strangeness of his ending, he drew the
ring from the dead man's finger, and had the corpse decently attired
and burned. The relics he gathered into a silver urn, upon which he
placed a golden crown, and sent it to Marcellus's son. But on the way
some Numidians fell in with the party who were escorting the urn, and
while they tried to take it away and the others struggled to retain
it, the bones were scattered on the ground. Hannibal, on hearing of
this, said, "Nothing can be done against the will of heaven." He
ordered the Numidians to be punished, but took no further thought
about collecting or sending away the relics of Marcellus, concluding
that some god had decreed the strange death and strange lack of burial
which had befallen him. This is the story related by Cornelius Nepos
and Valerius Maximus, but Livy and Augustus Cæsar declare that the urn
was brought to his son, and that it was splendidly buried. Besides
his monuments at Rome there was a gymnasium at Katana in Sicily which
bore his name, and statues and votive tablets from the plunder of
Syracuse were set tip in Samothrace in the temple of the gods called
Kabeiri, and in Lindus (in Rhodes) in the temple of Athena.

On his statue there, according to Poseidonius, these verses are
written:

"This monument, O stranger, doth enshrine
    Marcellus, of the famous Claudian line,
    Who seven times was consul, and in fight
    His country's foes o'erthrew and put to flight."

For the writer of this epitaph counted his two proconsulates as well
as his five consulates. His family remained one of the chief in Rome
down to the time of Marcellus, the nephew of Augustus, who was the son
of Octavia, Augustus's sister, and Caius Marcellus. He died in the
office of ædile while yet a bridegroom, having just married Augustus's
daughter Julia. In honour of his memory his mother Octavia established
a library, and Augustus built a theatre, both of which bore his name.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 13: _Civica corona_. The civic crown was made of oak leaves,
and was given only to him who had saved the life of a fellow-citizen
in war.]

[Footnote 14: Interreges were appointed when there were no consuls, to
hold comitia for the election of new ones.]

[Footnote 15: Vessels of five banks of oars.]

II. Since, then, Pelopidas never was defeated when he was in command,
and Marcellus gained more victories than any Roman of his time;
perhaps he who was so hard to conquer may, in consideration of his
many successes, be held equal to him who never suffered a reverse.
Moreover, the one took Syracuse, while the other failed before
Lacedæmon. But I hold it a greater feat than taking Sicily, to have
marched upon Sparta, and been the first man to cross the Eurotas,
unless indeed it should be said that the credit of this exploit
belongs more to Epameinondas than to Pelopidas, as also does the
battle of Leuktra, whereas the glory of Marcellus's achievements is
all his own. For he took Syracuse alone, and beat the Gauls without
his colleague, and, with no one to assist him, but every one hanging
back, he measured himself with Hannibal and changed the whole
complexion of the war, by being the first to introduce a daring
policy.

III. As for their deaths, I can praise neither one nor the other, but
I am grieved at the unworthy manner of their end. It is strange, that
Hannibal was never even wounded in a number of battles which it would
weary one to recount; and I admire the conduct of Chrysantas in
Xenophon's 'Cyropædia,' who, when standing with his weapon drawn,
about to strike an enemy, heard the trumpet sound the recall, and
leaving his man, quietly and orderly retreated. Yet Pelopidas may be
excused by his excitement during a battle, and his courage, which
urged him to avenge himself on the enemy, for the best thing is for
the general to be victorious and to survive, and the next, for him to
die "breathing forth his life in valour" as Euripides says. Thus his
death becomes no accident, but a premeditated act. And besides
Pelopidas's spirit, the assured victory which he saw within his grasp,
could he but kill the despot, not unreasonably made him make his
desperate attack; for it would have been hard for him to obtain
another opportunity of distinguishing himself so gloriously. But
Marcellus, without any necessity, without the excitement which
sometimes in perilous circumstances overpowers men's reason, pushed
heedlessly into danger, and died the death of a spy rather than a
general, risking his five consulships, his three triumphs, his spoils
and trophies won from kings against the worthless lives of Iberian and
Numidian mercenaries. They themselves must have felt ashamed at their
success, that the bravest, most powerful, and most celebrated of the
Romans should have fallen among a reconnoitring party of Fregellans.
Still, let not this be regarded as a reproach to these great men, but
rather a complaint addressed on their own behalf to them, especially
to that courage, to which they sacrificed all their other virtues,
disregarding their lives, as though their loss would fall upon
themselves only, and not upon their friends and native country. After
his death, Pelopidas was buried by his allies, fighting for whom he
died; but Marcellus was buried by the enemy at whose hands he fell.
The first was an enviable end, but the other is greater, as the
spectacle of an enemy honouring the valour by which he has suffered is
greater than that of a friend showing gratitude to a friend. In the
one case it is the man's glory alone that is respected, in the other,
his usefulness and value are as much thought of as his courage.

LIFE OF ARISTEIDES.

This battle was fought on the day of the month Boedromion, according
to the Athenian calendar; and on the twenty-sixth of the month Panemus
according to that of the Bœotians, on which day the Hellenic meeting
still takes place at Platæa, and sacrifice is offered to Zeus, the
Protector of Liberty, in memory of this victory. The discrepancy of
the dates is no marvel, seeing that even at the present day, when
astronomy is more accurately understood, different cities still begin
and end their months on different days.

XX. After the battle, as the Athenians would not assign the prize of
valour[24] to the Lacedæmonians, nor suffer them to set up a trophy,
the common cause of Greece was within a little of being ruined by the
quarrels of the two armies, had not Aristeides by argument and
entreaty prevailed upon his colleagues, especially Leokrates and
Myronides, to submit the dispute to the decision of all the Greeks.
Upon this a council was held, at which Theogeiton of Megara said that
the prize for valour ought to be given to another city, and not either
to Athens or Sparta, if they did not wish to bring about a civil war.
To this Kleokritus of Corinth made answer. All men expected that he
would demand the honour for Corinth, which city had acquitted itself
best, next to Athens and Sparta; but he made a very excellent and
conciliatory speech, demanding that the prize should be bestowed on
the Platæans, by which means neither of the claimants would be
aggrieved. This proposal was agreed to by Aristeides on behalf of the
Athenians, and by Pausanias on behalf of the Lacedæmonians. Having
thus settled their differences, they set apart from the plunder eighty
talents for the Platæans, with which they built the temple of Athena,
and the shrine, and also decorated the temple with paintings, which
even to this present day retain their lustre. The Lacedæmonians set up
a trophy for themselves, and the Athenians another one apart. When
they enquired at Delphi what sacrifice was to be offered, the oracle
bade them set up an altar to Zeus the Protector of the Free, and not
to sacrifice upon it until they had first put out all fires throughout
the country, because it had been defiled by the presence of the
barbarian, and had then fetched a new fire pure from pollution, from
the hearth at Delphi, which is common to all Greece. The chiefs of the
Greeks at once proceeded throughout the Platæan territory, forcing
every one to extinguish his fire, even in the case of funeral piles,
while Euchidas of Platæa, who promised that he would fetch fire as
quickly as possible, proceeded to Delphi. There he purified his body,
and having been besprinkled with holy water and crowned with laurel,
took fire from the altar, set off running back to Platæa, and arrived
there about sunset, having run a distance of a hundred and twenty-five
miles in one day. He embraced his fellow citizens, handed the fire to
them, fell down, and in a few moments died. The Platæans, to show
their admiration of him, buried him in the temple of Artemis Eukleia,
with this inscription on his tomb:

"Euchidas ran to Delphi and back again in one day."

[Footnote 25: Whether a cinerary urn for the ashes of the dead, or a
water-pot for drawing water is meant, I am unable to determine. Clough
takes the latter meaning, which is borne out by the context. On the
other hand the Greek word is used by Plutarch ('Life of Philopœmen,'
ch. xxi) in the sense of an urn to contain the ashes of the dead.]

LIFE OF MARCUS CATO.

I. Marcus Cato is said to have been born at Tusculum, but to have been
brought up and spent his time upon a farm belonging to his father in
the Sabine territory, before he began to take part in war or politics.
We know nothing of his ancestry, except that he himself tells us that
his father, Marcus, was a good man and brave soldier, and that his
grandfather, Cato, received several military rewards for his services,
and that having had five horses killed under him, he received the
value of them from the public treasury, as an acknowledgment of his
gallantry.

It was the Roman custom to call those who had no ancestry to recommend
them, but who rose by their own merits, _new_ men. This name was
applied to Cato, who said that he was indeed new to honours and posts
of importance, but that, in respect of his brave and virtuous
ancestry, he was a man of ancient family. His third name originally
was not Cato, but Priscus, and was changed to Cato on account of his
wisdom, for in Latin _catus_ means "clever." In appearance he was
rather red-haired, and grey-eyed, peculiarities which are
ill-naturedly dwelt upon by the writer of the epigram--

"Red-haired, grey-eyed, and savage-tusked as well,
    Porcius will find no welcome e'en in hell."

Accustomed as he was to hard exercise, temperate living, and frequent
campaigns, his body was always both healthy and strong; while he also
practised the power of speech, thinking it a necessary instrument for
a man who does not intend to live an obscure and inactive life. He
consequently improved his talents in this respect by pleading causes
in the neighbouring villages and towns, so that he was soon admitted
to be a capable speaker, and afterwards to be a good orator. From this
time all who conversed with him perceived a gravity and wisdom in his
mind which qualified him to undertake the most important duties of a
statesman. Not only was he so disinterested as to plead without
receiving money from his clients, but he also did not think the glory
which he gained in these contests to be that after which a man ought
to strive, in comparison with that which is gained in battle and
campaigns, in which he was so eager to distinguish himself that when
quite a lad his body was covered with wounds, all in front. He himself
tells us that he made his first campaign at the age of seventeen, when
Hannibal was ranging through Italy uncontrolled. In battle he was
prompt, stedfast, and undismayed, and was wont to address the enemy
with threats and rough language, and to encourage the others to do so,
as he rightly pointed out that this often cows the enemy's spirit as
effectually as blows. When on the march he used to carry his own arms,
and be followed by one servant who carried his provisions. It is said
that he never spoke harshly to this man, no matter what food he placed
before him, but that he would often help him to do his work when he
was at leisure from military duty. He drank only water when
campaigning, except that when suffering from parching thirst he would
ask for some vinegar, and sometimes when his strength fairly failed he
would drink a little wine.

II. Near his estate was a cottage which had once belonged to Manius
Curius, who three times received the honour of a triumph. Cato used
frequently to walk over and look at this cottage, and, as he observed
the smallness of the plot of ground attached to it, and the simplicity
of the dwelling itself, he would reflect upon how Curius, after having
made himself the first man in Rome, after conquering the most warlike
nations, and driving King Pyrrhus out of Italy, used to dig this
little plot of ground with his own hands, and dwelt in this little
cottage, after having thrice triumphed. It was there that the
ambassadors of the Samnites found him sitting by the hearth, cooking
turnips, and offered him much gold; but he sent them away, saying,
"that a man who was contented with such a supper, had no need of
gold, and that it was more honourable for him to conquer those who
possessed gold, than to possess it himself." Cato, after leaving the
cottage, full of these memories, returned to his own house and farm,
and after viewing its extent and the number of slaves upon it, he
increased the amount of his own daily labour, and retrenched his
superfluous expenses.

When Fabius Maximus took the city of Tarentum, Cato, who was a very
young lad at the time, was serving in his army. He became intimate
there with one Nearchus, a philosopher of the Pythagorean school, and
listened with much interest to his discourses. Hearing this man, like
Plato, describe pleasure as the greatest temptation to evil, and the
body as the chief hindrance to the soul, which can only free and
purify itself by such a course of reasoning as removes it from and
sets it above all bodily passions and feelings, he was yet more
encouraged in his love of simplicity and frugality. In other respects
he is said to have studied Hellenic literature late in life, and not
to have read Greek books till extreme old age, when he greatly
improved his style of oratory, partly by the study of Thucydides, but
chiefly by that of Demosthenes. Be this as it may, his writings are
full of Greek ideas and Greek anecdotes: and many of his apophthegms
and maxims are literally translated from the Greek.

III. The estate adjoining that of Cato belonged to one of the most
powerful and highly born patricians of Rome, Valerius Flaccus, a man
who had a keen eye for rising merit, and generously fostered it until
it received public recognition. This man heard accounts of Cato's life
from his servants, how he would proceed to the court early in the
morning, and plead the causes of all who required his services, and
then on returning to his farm would work with his servants, in winter
wearing a coarse coat without sleeves, in summer nothing but his
tunic, and how he used to sit at meals with his servants, eating the
same loaf and drinking the same wine. Many other stories of his
goodness and simplicity and sententious remarks were related to
Valerius, who became interested in his neighbour, and invited him to
dinner. They became intimate, and Valerius, observing his quiet and
ingenuous disposition, like a plant that requires careful treatment
and an extensive space in which to develop itself, encouraged and
urged him to take part in the political life of Rome. On going to Rome
he at once gained admirers and friends by his able pleadings in the
law courts, while he obtained considerable preferment by the interest
of Valerius, being appointed first military tribune, and then quæstor.
After this he became so distinguished a man as to be able to compete
with Valerius himself for the highest offices in the state, and they
were elected together, first as consuls, and afterwards as censors. Of
the older Romans, Cato attached himself particularly to Fabius
Maximus, a man of the greatest renown and power, although it was his
disposition and mode of life which Cato especially desired to imitate.
Wherefore he did not hesitate to oppose Scipio the Great, who was then
a young man, but a rival and opponent of Fabius. Cato was appointed to
act as his quæstor in the war in Africa, and on perceiving that Scipio
was living with his usual lavish expenditure, and supplying his
soldiery with extravagant pay, he sharply rebuked him, saying, "that
it was not the waste of the public money that vexed him so much as the
ruin of the old frugal habits of the soldiers, who were led to indulge
in pleasure and luxury by receiving more pay than was necessary to
supply their daily wants." When Scipio answered that he did not
require an economist for his quæstor, at a time when he was preparing
to wage war on a grand scale, and reminded him that he would have to
give an account to the Roman people of battles won, not of money
expended, Cato left the army of Scipio, which was then being assembled
in Sicily. He proceeded at once to Rome, and by adding his voice to
that of Fabius in the Senate, in blame of Scipio's unspeakable waste
of money, and his childish and unsoldierly love of the public
games[26] and the theatre, conduct more worthy of the president of a
public festival than of the commander-in-chief of an army, prevailed
upon the people to send tribunes to enquire into the charges against
him, and if they proved true, to bring him back to Rome. When they
arrived in Sicily, however, Scipio pointed out to them that the
preparations which he had made would ensure him the victory, and that
although he loved pleasant society in his hours of leisure, yet that
he had never allowed his pleasures to interfere with his serious
duties. The tribunes were perfectly satisfied with this explanation,
and Scipio sailed for Africa.

IV. Cato, however, gained considerable credit by his speeches on this
occasion, and the Romans generally called him the new Demosthenes; yet
his manner of life was more admired than his eloquence. Cleverness of
speech was a quality which nearly all the young men of the time sought
to attain, but Cato was singular in his keeping up the severe
traditions of his ancestors in labouring with his own hands, eating a
simple dinner, lighting no fire to cook his breakfast, wearing a plain
dress, living in a mean house, and neither coveting superfluities nor
courting their possessors. The Romans were at this period extending
their empire so much as to lose much of their own original simplicity
of living, as each new conquest brought them into contact with foreign
customs and new modes of life. They therefore naturally looked with
admiration upon Cato, observing that while they became enervated by
pleasures and broke down under labours, he on the other hand seemed
unaffected by either, and that too, not only while he was young and
eager for fame: but even when he was an old grey-headed man, after he
had been consul and had triumphed, he yet, like a victorious athlete,
still kept himself in training, and never relaxed his severe
discipline. He himself tells us that he never wore a garment worth
more than a hundred drachmas, that when he was general and consul he
still drank the same wine as his servants, that his dinner never cost
him more than thirty ases in the market, and that he only indulged
himself to this extent for the good of the state, that he might be
strong and able to serve his country in the field. When he was left a
piece of Babylonian tapestry he at once disposed of it; none of his
rooms were whitewashed, and he never bought a slave for more than
fifteen hundred drachmas, seeing that he required, not effeminate and
handsome servants, but hardworking and strong men, to tend his horses
and herd his cattle: and these, too, when they grew old and past work
he thought it best to sell, and not feed them at his expense when they
were useless. His rule was that nothing is cheap which one does not
want, but that superfluities are dearly purchased even if they cost
but one penny: and that it is better to buy land which can be
ploughed, or where cattle can graze, than beds of flowers which
require watering, and paths which have to be swept and kept in order.

V. These habits some ascribed to narrowness of mind, while others
thought that he carried parsimony and avarice to excess in himself in
order by his example to reform and restrain others. Be this as it may,
I for my own part consider that his conduct in treating his slaves
like beasts of burden, and selling them when old and worn out, is the
mark of an excessively harsh disposition, which disregards the claims
of our common human nature, and merely considers the question of
profit and loss. Kindness, indeed, is of wider application than mere
justice; for we naturally treat men alone according to justice and the
laws, while kindness and gratitude, as though from a plenteous spring,
often extend even to irrational animals. It is right for a good man to
feed horses which have been worn out in his service, and not merely to
train dogs when they are young, but to take care of them when they are
old. When the Athenian people built the Parthenon, they set free the
mules which had done the hardest work in drawing the stones up to the
acropolis, and let them graze where they pleased unmolested. It is
said that one of them came of its own accord to where the works were
going on, and used to walk up to the acropolis with the beasts who
were drawing up their loads, as if to encourage them and show them the
way. This mule was, by a decree of the people of Athens, maintained at
the public expense for the rest of its life. The racehorses of Kimon
also, who won an Olympic victory, are buried close to the monument of
their master. Many persons, too, have made friends and companions of
dogs, as did Xanthippus in old times, whose dog swam all the way to
Salamis beside his master's ship when the Athenians left their city,
and which he buried on the promontory which to this day is called the
Dog's Tomb.[27] We ought not to treat living things as we do our
clothes and our shoes, and throw them away after we have worn them
out; but we ought to accustom ourselves to show kindness in these
cases, if only in order to teach ourselves our duty towards one
another. For my own part I would not even sell an ox that had laboured
for me because he was old, much less would I turn an old man out of
his accustomed haunts and mode of life, which is as great an
affliction to him as sending him into a foreign land, merely that I
might gain a few miserable coins by selling one who must be as useless
to his buyer as he was to his seller.

Cato, however, as if taking a perverse pleasure in flaunting his
meannesses, relates that he left behind him in Spain the horse which
he rode when consul there, in order to save the state the cost of
carrying him over to Italy. Whether those acts of his are to be
ascribed to magnanimity or narrow-mindedness the reader must decide
for himself.

VI. He was a man of wonderful temperance, in all other respects also.
For example, when he was general, he only drew from the public stock
three Attic bushels of wheat a month for himself and his servants, and
less than three half-bushels of barley a day for his horses. When he
was Governor of Sardinia, where former governors had been in the habit
of charging their tents, bedding, and wearing-apparel to the province,
and likewise making it pay large sums for their entertainment and that
of their friends, he introduced an unheard-of system of economy. He
charged nothing to the province, and visited the various cities
without a carriage, walking on foot alone, attended by one single
public servant carrying his robe of state and the vessel to make
libations at a sacrifice. With all this he showed himself so affable
and simple to those under his rule, so severe and inexorable in the
administration of justice, and so vigilant and careful in seeing that
his orders were duly executed, that the government of Rome never was
more feared or more loved in Sardinia than when he governed that
island.

VII. His conversation seems also to have had this character, for he
was cheerful and harsh all at once, pleasant and yet severe as a
companion, fond of jokes, but morose at the same time, just as Plato
tells us that Sokrates, if judged merely from his outside, appeared to
be only a silly man with a face like a satyr, who was rude to all he
met, though his inner nature was earnest and full of thoughts that
moved his hearers to tears and touched their hearts. For this reason I
cannot understand how any persons can see a likeness between the
orations of Lysias and those of Cato; however, this point must be
decided by those who are more skilled than myself in the comparison of
oratorical styles. I shall now relate a few of his more remarkable
sayings, believing that a man's real character can be better judged of
by his words than by his looks, although some people hold the contrary
opinion.

VIII. Once when he wished to restrain the Romans from distributing a
large quantity of corn as a largesse to the people, he began his
speech: "It is difficult, my fellow-citizens, to make the stomach hear
reason, because it has no ears." When desiring to blame the
extravagance of the Romans, he said that a city could not be safe in
which a fish sold dearer than an ox. He said, too, that the Romans
were like sheep, who never form opinions of their own, but follow
where the others lead them. "Just so," said he, "when you are
assembled together you are led by men whose advice you would scorn to
take about your own private affairs." With regard to female influence
he once said, "All mankind rule their wives, we rule all mankind, and
we are ruled by our wives." This remark, however, is borrowed from
Themistokles. He one day, when his child was instigating its mother to
lay many commands upon him, said, "Wife, remember that the Athenians
rule the Greeks, I rule the Athenians, you rule me, and your child
rules you; wherefore let him not abuse his power, which, though he
knows it not, is greater than that of anyone else in Greece." Cato
also said that the Romans fixed the price, not only of different dyes,
but of different professions. "Just as the dyers," said he, "dye stuff
of whatever colour they see people pleased with, so do our young men
only study and apply themselves to those subjects which are praised
and commended by you." He used also to beg of them, if they had become
great by virtue and self-restraint, not to degenerate; and if, on the
other hand, their empire had been won by licentiousness and vice, to
reform themselves, since by the latter means they had become so great
as not to need any further assistance from them. Those who were always
seeking office, he said, were like men who could not find their way,
who always wished to walk with lictors[28] before them to show them
the road. He blamed his countrymen for often electing the same men to
public offices. "You will appear," said he, "either to think that the
office is not worth much, or else that there are not many worthy to
fill it." Alluding to one of his enemies who led a dissolute and
discreditable life, he said: "That man's mother takes it as a curse
rather than a blessing if any one hopes that her son will survive
her." When a certain man sold his ancestral estate, which was situated
by the seashore, Cato pretended to admire him, as being more powerful
than the sea itself, "for this man," said he, has "drunk up the fields
which the sea itself could not swallow." When King Eumenes came to
Rome the Senate received him with special honours, and he was much
courted and run after. Cato, however, held himself aloof and would not
go near him, and when some one said "Yet he is an excellent man, and a
good friend to Rome," he answered, "It may be so, but a king is by
nature an animal that lives on human flesh." None of those who had
borne the title of king, according to Cato, were to be compared with
Epameinondas, or Perikles, or Themistokles, or with Manius Curius or
Hamilcar Barcas. He used to say that his enemies hated him because he
began his day's work while it was still dark, and because he neglected
his own affairs to attend to those of the public. He also was wont to
say that he had rather his good actions should go unrewarded than that
his bad ones should be unpunished; and that he pardoned all who did
wrong except himself.

IX. When the Romans sent three ambassadors to Bithynia, one of whom
was crippled by the gout, another had been trepanned and had a piece
taken out of his head, and the third was thought to be a simpleton,
Cato remarked that the Romans had sent an embassy which had neither
feet, head, nor heart. When, for the sake of Polybius the historian,
Scipio entreated Cato to exert his influence on behalf of the Achæan
exiles, after a long debate in the Senate, where some advised that
they should be sent back to their own country, and some that they
should still be detained at Rome, he got up and said, "Have we nothing
better to do than to sit all day discussing whether a parcel of old
Greeks shall be buried here or in Achaia?" A few days after the Senate
had decreed the restoration of the exiles, Polybius proposed to make
another application, that they should be restored to all the offices
which they formerly held in Achaia. He asked Cato whether he thought
that he should succeed in this second appeal to the Senate; to which
Cato answered with a smile, that he was imitating Ulysses, when he
returned again into the cave of the Cyclops to fetch the hat and
girdle which he had left behind and forgotten. He said that wise men
gained more advantage from fools, than fools from wise men; for the
wise men avoid the errors of fools, but fools cannot imitate the
example of wise men. He said that he loved young men to have red
cheeks rather than pale ones, and that he did not care for a soldier
who used his hands while he marched and his feet while he fought, or
one who snored louder in bed than he shouted in battle. When
reproaching a very fat man he said, "How can this man's body be useful
to his country, when all parts between the neck and the groin are
possessed by the belly?" Once when an epicure wished to become his
friend, he said that he could not live with a man whose palate was
more sensitive than his heart. He said also that the soul of a lover
inhabits the body of his beloved. He himself tells us, that in his
whole life he repented of three things only:--First, that he had
trusted a woman with a secret. Secondly, that he had gone by water
when he might have gone by land. Thirdly, that he had passed one day
without having made his will. To an old man who was acting wrongly he
said, "My good sir, old age is ugly enough without your adding the
deformity of wickedness to it." When a certain tribune, who was
suspected of being a poisoner, was endeavouring to carry a bad law,
Cato remarked, "Young man, I do not know which is the worst for us, to
drink what you mix, or to enact what you propose." Once when he was
abused by a man of vicious life, he answered, "We are not contending
upon equal terms; you are accustomed to hearing and using bad
language, while I am both unused to hearing it and unwilling to use
it."

X. When he was elected consul, together with his friend and neighbour
Valerius Flaccus, the province which fell to his lot was that which
the Romans call Hither Spain.[29] While he was there engaged in
establishing order, partly by persuasion, and partly by force, he was
attacked by a large army of the natives, and was in danger of being
disgracefully defeated by their overwhelming numbers. Consequently he
applied for aid to the neighbouring tribe of the Celtiberians, who
demanded as the price of their assistance the sum of two hundred
talents. At this every one protested that it was unworthy of Romans to
pay barbarians for their alliance, but Cato said that he saw no evil
in the practice, since, if the Romans were victorious, they would pay
them from the spoils of the enemy, while if they were defeated there
would be no one to demand the money and no one to pay it. He won a
pitched battle on this occasion, and was very successful in his whole
campaign. Polybius indeed tells us that in one day at his command all
the cities on this side of the river Guadalquiver pulled down their
walls; and yet they were very numerous, and filled with a warlike
population. Cato himself tells us that he took more cities than he
spent days in Spain; nor is this a vain boast, if the number captured
really, as is stated, amounted to four hundred. His soldiers enriched
themselves considerably during the campaign; and at the termination of
it he distributed a pound of silver to each man, saying that it was
better that many Romans should return to Rome with silver in their
pockets than that a few should return with gold. He himself states
that he received no part of the plunder except what he ate or drank.
"I do not," said he, "blame those who endeavour to enrich themselves
by such means, but I had rather vie with the noblest in virtue than
with the richest in wealth, or with the most covetous in
covetousness." He not only kept his own hands clean, but those of his
followers also. He took five servants to the war with him. One of
these, Paccius by name, bought three boys at a sale of captives; but
when Cato heard of it, Paccius, rather than come into his presence,
hanged himself. Cato sold the boys, and paid the price into the public
treasury.

XI. While he was still in Spain, Scipio the Great, who was his
personal enemy, desiring to check his career of success, and to obtain
the management of Spanish affairs for himself, contrived to get
himself appointed to succeed Cato in his government. He at once
hurried to Spain and brought Cato's rule to an end. Cato, however, at
once marched to meet Scipio with an escort of five companies of
infantry and five hundred horsemen. On his way he conquered the tribe
of the Lacetani; and finding among them six hundred deserters from the
Roman army, he put them to death. When Scipio expressed his
dissatisfaction with this, Cato sarcastically answered, that Rome
would be greatest if those of high birth and station, and those of
plebeian origin like himself, would only contend with one another in
virtue. However, as the Senate decreed that nothing that Cato had
settled in the province should be altered or rearranged, Scipio found
that it was he rather than Cato that was disgraced, as he had to pass
his time in inglorious idleness, while Cato, after enjoying a triumph,
did not retire into a life of luxury and leisure, as is done by so
many men whose object is display rather than true virtue, after they
have risen to the highest honours in the state by being elected
consuls and enjoying the honour of a triumph. He did not impair the
glorious example which he had given, by withdrawing his attention from
the affairs of his country, but offered his services to his friends
and fellow-countrymen, both in the courts of law and in the field, as
willingly as those who have just begun their public career, and are
keenly eager to be elected to some new office in which they may win
fresh distinction.

XII. He went with the consul Tiberius Sempronius as legate, and
assisted him in regulating the country about the Danube and Thrace;
and he also served as military tribune under Manius Acilius during his
campaign in Greece against Antiochus the Great, who caused more terror
to the Romans than any one man since the time of Hannibal. Antiochus
had originally inherited nearly the whole of Asia, that is, as much as
Seleukus Nikator had possessed, and having added many warlike tribes
to his empire, was so elated by his conquests as to attack the Romans,
whom he regarded as the only nation remaining in the whole world which
was worthy to be his antagonist. He put forward as a plausible reason
for beginning the war that he intended to liberate the Greeks, who did
not require his interference, as they had just been made free and
independent by the Romans, who had delivered them from the tyranny of
Philip and the Macedonians. Antiochus crossed over into Greece, which
at once became unsettled, and a prey to hopes and fears suggested by
her political leaders. Manius at once sent ambassadors to the various
cities. Titus Flamininus, as has been related in his Life, restrained
the greater part of them from revolutionary proceedings, and kept them
to their allegiance, but Cato won over Corinth, Patræ, and Ægium. Most
of his time was spent in Athens; and there is said to be still extant
a speech which he made to the people there in Greek, in which he
speaks with admiration of the virtue of the Athenians of old, and
dwells upon his own pleasure in viewing so great and beautiful a city.
This, however, is a fabrication, for we know that he conversed with
the Athenians through an interpreter, though he was able to speak
their language, because he wished to keep to the ways of his fathers,
and administer a rebuke to those who extravagantly admired the Greeks.
Thus he laughed at Postumius Albinus, who wrote a history in Greek and
begged that his mistakes might be pardoned, saying that it would be
right to pardon them if he wrote his history by a decree of the
council of Amphiktyons. He himself says that the Athenians were
surprised it the shortness and pregnant nature of his talk; for what
he said in a few words, his interpreter translated by a great many:
and in general he concludes that the Greeks talk from the lips, and
the Romans from the heart.

XIII. When Antiochus occupied the pass of Thermopylæ with his army,
and, after adding to the natural strength of the place by artificial
defences, established himself there as if in an impregnable position,
the Romans decided that to attack him in front was altogether
impossible, but Cato, remembering how the Persians under Xerxes had
turned the Greek forces by a circuitous march over the mountains, took
a part of the force and set off by night. When they had gone for some
distance over the mountains, the prisoner who served as their guide
lost his way, and wandered about in that precipitous and pathless
wilderness so as to cause great discouragement to the soldiers. Seeing
this, Cato ordered every one to halt and await his orders, and
himself, with one companion, one Lucius Manlius, an experienced
mountaineer, laboriously and daringly plunged along through intense
darkness, for there was no moon, while the trees and rocks added to
their difficulties by preventing their seeing distinctly whither they
were going, until they came to a path, which, as they thought, led
directly down upon the camp of the enemy. Hereupon they set up marks
to guide them upon some conspicuous crags of Mount Kallidromus, and
returning to the army, led it to these marks, and started along the
paths which they had descried. But before they had proceeded far the
path ended in a precipice, at which they were both surprised and
disheartened; for they could not tell, either by sight or hearing,
that they were close to the enemy. It was now about daybreak, and they
thought that they heard voices near at hand, and soon were able to see
a Greek camp and an outpost at the foot of the precipice. Cato
hereupon halted his army, and ordered the Firmiani,[30] in whom he
reposed especial confidence, to come forward alone. When they had
assembled round him, he said, "I wish to take one of the enemy
prisoner, and learn from him of what troops this outpost is formed,
what their numbers are, how the rest of the army are placed, and what
preparations they have made to resist us. You must dash upon them as
quickly and boldly as lions do upon their defenceless prey." At these
words of Cato's the Firmiani at once rushed down and attacked the
outpost. The suddenness of their onset threw the enemy into complete
confusion, and they soon caught one of them and brought him before
Cato. Learning from this man that all the rest of the army was with
King Antiochus himself, guarding the pass of Thermopylæ, and that only
a body of six hundred picked Ætolians were watching the path over the
mountains, Cato despising so small and contemptible a force, at once
drew his sword, and led on his troops with shouts and trumpets
sounding the charge. The Ætolians, as soon as they saw the Romans
descending from the hills, fled to the main body, and filled it with
confusion and terror.

XIV. Meanwhile Manius on the lower ground had attacked the
fortifications in the pass with his entire force. Antiochus was struck
on the mouth with a stone which knocked out several of his teeth, and
the pain of his wound compelled him to wheel round his horse and
retreat. His troops nowhere withstood the Romans, but, although they
had endless means of escape by roads where they could scarcely be
followed, yet they crowded through the narrow pass with deep marshy
ground on the one hand and inaccessible rocks upon the other, and
there trampled each other to death for fear of the swords of the
Romans.

Cato never seems to have been sparing of his own praise, and thought
that great deeds required to be told in boastful language. He gives a
very pompous account of this battle, and says that all those who saw
him pursuing and cutting down the enemy felt that Cato did not owe so
much to the Romans, as the Romans owed to Cato. He also says that the
consul Manius immediately after the victory was won, enfolded him for
a long time in a close embrace, and loudly declared that neither he
nor all the Roman people could ever do as much for Cato as he had that
day done for them. He was sent immediately after the battle to bear
the news of the victory to Rome, and reached Brundusium after a
prosperous voyage.

From that place he drove in one day to Tarentum, and in four more
days reached Rome with the news, on the fifth day after his landing.
His arrival filled the whole city with feasting and rejoicing, and
made the Roman people believe that there was no nation in the world
which could resist their arms.

XV. Of Cato's warlike exploits these which we have related are the
most remarkable. In his political life he seems to have thought one of
his most important duties to be the impeachment and prosecution of
those whom he thought to be bad citizens. He himself attacked many
persons, and aided and encouraged others in doing so, a notable
example being his conduct towards Scipio in the affair of Petillius.
However, as Scipio was a man of noble birth and great spirit, he
treated the attack made upon him with contempt, and Cato, perceiving
that he could not succeed in getting him condemned to death, desisted
from annoying him. But he was active in obtaining the condemnation of
Scipio's brother Lucius, who was adjudged to pay a heavy fine, which
was beyond his means to provide, so that he had nearly been cast into
prison, but was set free by the intervention of the tribunes of the
people.

It is related of him that he once met in the forum a young man who had
just succeeded in obtaining the disfranchisement, by an action at law,
of an enemy of his father, who was dead. Cato took him by the hand and
said, "Thus ought men to honour their parents when they die, not with
the blood of lambs and kids, but with the tears and condemnation of
their enemies." He himself is said to have been the defendant in
nearly fifty actions, the last of which was tried when he was
eighty-six years of age: on which occasion he uttered that well-known
saying, that it was hard for a man who had lived in one generation to
be obliged to defend himself before another. And this was not the end
of his litigations, for four years later, when at the age of ninety,
he impeached Servius Galba. Indeed his life, like that of Nestor,
seems to havo reached over three generations. He, as had been related,
was a bitter political opponent of Scipio Africanus the Great, and he
continued his enmity to Scipio's adopted son, called Scipio the
Younger, who was really the son of Æmilius Paulus, the conqueror of
Perseus and the Macedonians.

XVI. Ten years after his consulship, Cato became a candidate for the
office of censor. This is the highest dignity to which a Roman can
aspire, and may be regarded as the goal of political life. Its powers
are very extensive, and it is especially concerned with the regulation
of public morals, and the mode of life of the citizens of Rome. The
Romans thought that none of a man's actions, his marriage, his family,
his mode of life, his very entertainments, ought to be uncontrolled,
and managed according to his own will and pleasure. They considered
that a man's true character was much more clearly shown by his private
life than by his public behaviour, and were wont to choose two
citizens, one a patrician, and the other a plebeian, whose duty it was
to watch over the morals of the people, and check any tendency to
licentiousness or extravagance. These officers they called censors,
and they had power to deprive a Roman knight of his horse, and to
expel men of loose and disorderly life from the Senate. They also took
a census of property, and kept a register of the various tribes and
classes of the citizens; and they likewise exercised various other
important powers. Cato's candidature was opposed by nearly all the
most distinguished members of the Senate, for the patricians viewed
him with especial dislike, regarding it as an insult to the nobility
that men of obscure birth should attain to the highest honours in the
state, while all those who were conscious of any private vices or
departures from the ways of their fathers, feared the severities of
one who, they knew, would be harsh and inexorable when in power.

These classes consequently combined together against Cato, and put up
no less than seven candidates to contest the censorship with him, and
endeavoured to soothe the people by holding out to them hopes of a
lenient censor, as though that were what they required. Cato on the
other hand would not relax his severity in the least, but threatened
evil doers in his speeches from the rostra, and insisted that the city
required a most searching reformation. He told the people that if they
were wise, they would choose not the most agreeable, but the most
thorough physicians to perform this operation for them, and that
these would be himself and Valerius Flaccus; for with him as a
colleague he imagined that he might make some progress in the work of
destroying, by knife and cautery, the hydra of luxury and effeminacy.
Of the other candidates he said that he saw that each one was eager to
get the office and fill it badly, because he was afraid of those who
could fill it well. The Roman people on this occasion showed itself so
truly great and worthy to be courted by great men, as not to be
alarmed at the earnest severity of Cato; but, setting aside all those
plausible candidates who promised merely to consult their pleasure,
elected Cato and Valerius censors. It seemed, indeed, as if Cato,
inatead of being a candidate for election, was already in office and
issuing his commands to the people, which were at once obeyed.

XVII. As soon as he was elected, Cato appointed his friend and
colleague, Lucius Valerius Flaccus, chief of the Senate. He expelled
several senators, amongst whom was Lucius Quintius, who had been
consul seven years before, and, which was even a greater distinction
than the consulship, was the brother of Titus Quintius Flamininus, the
conqueror of Philip. He was expelled from the Senate for the following
reason. Lucius had a favourite boy who never left his person, and
followed him even on his campaigns. This boy had more power and
received greater attention than the most trusty of his friends and
relatives. Now, when Lucius was governor of a province as proconsul,
this boy once, at a drinking party, was flattering him over his wine,
saying that "Although there was going to be a show of gladiators at
Rome, yet I did not stay to see it, but came out here to you, although
I longed to see a man killed." Lucius, to please him, answered in the
same tone, "If that be all, do not lie there and fret, for I will soon
gratify your wish." He at once ordered a condemned criminal to be
brought into the banqueting hall, and one of his servants to stand by
him with an axe, and then again asked his favourite whether he wished
to see a man struck dead. When the boy said that he did, he bade the
servant cut off the man's head. This is the account which most writers
give of the transaction, and it is that which Cicero introduces Cato
as relating in his dialogue "On Old Age;" but Livy says that the man
who was put to death was a Gaulish deserter, and that Lucius did not
employ a servant, but slew him with his own hand, and this is the
version which Cato has followed in his written account of the matter.
When Cato discussed what took place at this wine party, Lucius
endeavoured to deny it, but on being challenged to state exactly what
happened he refused to answer. He was most justly condemned to lose
his right as a senator; but afterwards, when some spectacle was being
witnessed in the theatre, he walked past the place reserved for men of
consular rank, and sat down in the humblest seat of all, which so
moved the people to compassion, that they forced him by their clamour
to resume his former seat, thus as far as they were able reversing the
sentence upon him and condoning his offence.

Cato expelled another senator, who was thought likely to be soon
elected consul, named Manilius, because he had kissed his wife in the
daytime in the presence of his daughter. He himself said that his own
wife never embraced him except when it thundered loudly, and added by
way of joke, that he was happy when Jupiter was pleased to thunder.

XVIII. His conduct in depriving of his horse Lucius Scipio, the
brother of Scipio Africanus, a man who had been decreed a triumph, was
censured, as being merely prompted by private spite; as he seemed
merely to do it in order to insult Scipio Africanus after his death.
But what caused the greatest dissatisfaction were his restrictions on
luxury. This he could not attack openly, because it had taken such
deep root among the people, but he caused all clothes, carriages,
women's ornaments, and furniture, which exceeded fifteen hundred
drachmas in value to be rated at ten times their value and taxed
accordingly, as he thought that those who possessed the most valuable
property ought to contribute most largely to the revenues of the
state. In addition to this he imposed a tax on all citizens of three
copper ases for every thousand, in order that those who were burdened
with an excessive taxation on objects of luxury, when they saw
persons of frugal and simple habits paying so small a tax on the same
income, might cease from their extravagance. This measure gained him
the hatred of those who were taxed so heavily for their luxuries, and
of those who, to avoid excessive taxation, were obliged to give up
their luxuries. Most persons are as much irritated at losing the means
of displaying their wealth as at losing their wealth itself, and it is
in superfluities, not in necessaries, that wealth can be displayed.
This is what is said to have so much surprised Ariston the
Philosopher, that men should consider those persons fortunate who
possess what is superfluous, rather than those who possess what is
necessary and useful. Skopas the Thessalian also, when one of his
friends asked him for something which was not particularly useful to
him, and added, that he did not ask for anything necessary or useful,
answered, "Indeed, it is in these useless and superfluous things that
my wealth chiefly consists." For the desire of wealth is not connected
with any of our physical necessities, and is an artificial want
arising from too much regard for the opinion of the vulgar.

XIX. Cato paid no attention to those who blamed his conduct, and
proceeded to measures of still greater severity. He cut off the
water-pipes, by which water was conveyed from the public fountains
into private houses and gardens, destroyed all houses that encroached
upon the public streets, lowered the price of contracts for public
works, and farmed out the public revenues for the highest possible
rents. All this made him still more unpopular. Titus Flamininus and
his friends attacked him, and prevailed upon the Senate to annul the
contracts which he had made for the building of temples and the
construction of public works, on the ground that they were
disadvantageous to the state. They also encouraged the boldest of the
tribunes to prosecute him before the people, and to fine him two
talents. He likewise received violent opposition in the matter of the
basilica, or public hall, which he built at the public expense in the
forum below the senate house, and which was called the Basilica
Porcia.

In spite of all this, his censorship seems to have been wonderfully
popular with the Roman people. When they placed his statue in the
Temple of Hygieia, they did not enumerate his campaigns or triumphs in
the inscription on the base, but wrote what we may translate as
follows: "This statue was erected to Cato because, when Censor,
finding the state of Rome corrupt and degenerate, he, by introducing
wise regulations and virtuous discipline, restored it."

At one time Cato affected to despise those who took pleasure in
receiving honours of this kind, and used to say that while they plumed
themselves on being represented in brass or marble, they forgot that
the fairest image was that of himself which every citizen bore in his
heart. When any one expressed surprise at his not having a statue,
when so many obscure men had obtained that honour, he answered, "I had
rather that men should ask why I have no statue, than that they should
ask why I have one." A good citizen, he said, ought not even to allow
himself to be praised, unless the state were benefited thereby. He has
glorified himself by recording that when men were detected in any
fault, they would excuse themselves by saying that they must be
pardoned if they did anything amiss, for they were not Catos: and that
those who endeavoured clumsily to imitate his proceedings were called
left-handed Catos. Also he states that the Senate looked to him in
great emergencies as men in a storm look to the pilot, and that when
he was not present, they frequently postponed their more important
business. This indeed is confirmed by other writers: for he had great
influence in Rome on account of his virtuous life, his eloquence, and
his great age.

XX. He was a good father and a good husband, and was in his private
life an economist of no ordinary kind, as he did not despise
money-making or regard it as unworthy of his abilities. For this
reason I think I ought to relate how well he managed his private
affairs. He married a wife who was well born, though not rich; for he
thought that though all classes might possess equally good sense, yet
that a woman of noble birth would be more ashamed of doing wrong, and
therefore more likely to encourage her husband to do right. He used to
say that a man who beat his wife or his children laid sacrilegious
hands on the holiest of things. He also said that he had rather be a
good husband than a great statesman, and that what he especially
admired in Sokrates the Philosopher was his patience and kindness in
bearing with his ill-tempered wife and his stupid children. When his
son was born, he thought that nothing except the most important
business of state ought to prevent his being present while his wife
washed the child and wrapped it in swaddling clothes. His wife suckled
the child herself; nay, she often gave her breast to the children of
her slaves, and so taught them to have a brotherly regard for her own
son.

As soon as he was able to learn, Cato himself taught him his letters,
although he had a clever slave named Chilon, who taught many children
to read. He himself declares that he did not wish a slave to reprove
his son or pull his ears because he was slow at learning. He taught
the boy to read, and instructed him also in the Roman law and in
bodily exercises; not confining himself to teaching him to hurl the
javelin, to fight in complete armour, and to ride, but also to use his
fists in boxing, to endure the extremes of heat and cold, and to swim
through swiftly-flowing and eddying rivers. He tells us that he
himself wrote books on history with his own hands in large letters,
that the boy might start in life with a useful knowledge of what his
forefathers had done, and he was as careful not to use an indecenr
expression before his son as he would have been before the vestal
virgins. He never bathed with him; which indeed seems to have been
customary at Rome, as even fathers-in-law scrupled to bathe naked
before their sons-in-law. In later times, however, the Romans learned
from the Greeks the habit of bathing naked, and have taught the Greeks
to do so even in the presence of women.

While Cato was engaged in this great work of forming his son's
character and completing his education he found him eager to learn,
and able to make great progress from his natural ability: but he
appeared so weak and delicate that his father was obliged to relax the
stern simplicity of his own life in his favour, and allow him some
indulgences in diet. The young man, although so weakly, yet proved
himself a good soldier in the wars, and distinfuished himself greatly
in the battle in which Æmilius Paulus defeated King Perseus.
Afterwards, upon the same day, he either had his sword struck from his
hand or let it fall from weakness, and in his grief at the loss got
together some of his friends and prevailed upon them again to charge
the enemy. With great exertions they succeeded in clearing a space,
and at length discovered his sword under a great heap of arms and
corpses of friends and foes alike which were piled upon it. Paulus,
the commander-in-chief, was much pleased with the youth's eagerness to
regain his sword, and sent a letter to Cato in which he spoke in the
highest terms of the courage and honourable feeling which he had
shown. He afterwards married Tertia, the sister of Scipio, and had the
gratification of pleasing his father as much as himself by thus
allying himself with one of the noblest families in Rome. Thus was
Cato rewarded for the care which he had bestowed upon his son's
education.

XXI. He possessed a large number of slaves, and when captives were for
sale he always purchased those who were young, and who, like colts or
puppies, could be taught and trained to their duties. None of them
ever entered any house but his own, unless sent thither by Cato or by
his wife: and if they were asked what Cato was doing, they always
answered that they did not know. His rule was, that a slave ought
either to be doing his business or to be asleep; and he greatly
preferred good sleepers, as he thought that they were more easy
tempered than wakeful persons, and also that men who had slept well
were better able to work than those who had lain awake. Knowing that
love affairs lead slaves into mischief more than anything else, he
permitted them to consort with his own female slaves at a fixed price,
but forbade them to have anything to do with other women.

Cato in his earlier days, being a poor man, and always employed in
service in the field, never complained of any thing that he ate, and
thought it most disgraceful to quarrel with his servant for not having
pleased his palate. Subsequently, however, as he became richer, he
used to invite his friends and colleagues to dinner, and after the
repast was wont to punish with the scourge those servants who had made
mistakes or cooked the food badly. He always endeavoured to establish
some quarrel amongst his slaves, so that they might plot against one
another, instead of combining against himself; and when any of them
appeared to have committed any crime deserving to be punished by
death, the offender was formally tried, and if found guilty, was put
to death in the presence of all his fellow-servants.

As Cato grew more eager to make money, he declared that farming was
more an amusement than a source of income, and preferred investing his
money in remunerative undertakings, such as marshes that required
draining, hot springs, establishments for washing and cleaning
clothes, land which would produce an income by pasturage or by the
sale of wood, and the like, which afforded him a considerable revenue,
and one which, as he said, not Jupiter himself could injure, meaning
that he was not dependent upon the weather for his income, as farmers
are. He also used to deal in marine assurance, which is thought to be
a most dangerous form of investment, which he managed in the following
manner. For the sake of security he made those who wished to borrow
money form themselves into an association of fifty persons,
representing as many ships, and held one share in the undertaking
himself, which was managed by his freedman Quintio, who himself used
to sail in the ships of the association and transact their mercantile
business.

He used to lend money to his slaves, if they desired it. They used
with the money to buy young slaves, teach them a trade at Cato's
expense for a year, and then dispose of them. Many of these Cato
retained in his own service, paying the price offered by the highest
bidder, and deducting from it the original cost of the slave. When
endeavouring to encourage his son to act in a similar manner, he used
to say that it was not the part of a man, but of a lone woman, to
diminish one's capital; and once, with an excessive exaggeration, he
said that the most glorious and godlike man was he who on his death
was found to have earned more than he inherited.

XXII. When he was an old man, Karneades the academic, and Diogenes
the stoic philosopher, came as ambassadors to Rome on the part of the
Athenians, to beg that they might not be forced to pay a fine of five
hundred talents which had been imposed upon them in consequence of an
action at law, brought against the Athenians by the people of Oropus,
before the people of Sikyon as judges, having been allowed to go
against them by default. Such of the Roman youths as had any taste for
literature frequented the society of these men, and took great
interest in hearing their discussions. They were especially delighted
with Karneades, a man of great and recognised ability, who obtained
large and enthusiastic audiences at his lectures, and filled the whole
city with his fame. Nothing was talked of except how a single Greek
with wonderful powers of eloquence and persuasion had so bewitched the
youth of Rome that they forsook all other pleasures, and plunged
wildly into philosophic speculations. The greater part of the citizens
were well pleased with this, and looked on with great satisfaction at
their sons' study of Greek literature, and their intimacy with such
celebrated men; but Cato, when the taste for philosophy first sprang
up in Rome, was vexed at it, and feared that the young men might
become more eager to gain distinction by fluent speaking than by
warlike exploits. However, when the fame of the philosophers
increased, and a distinguished man, Caius Acilius, at the general
request, translated their first lectures to the Senate, Cato decided
that the philosophers must at once be conducted with all due honours
out of the city. He came to the Senate and made a speech, in which he
blamed them for having allowed an embassy to remain so long at Rome
without accomplishing its purpose, although nothing was easier than
for it to gain its point. He called upon them therefore, to decide as
soon as possible and come to a vote upon the matter about which this
embassy was come, in order that these philosophers might return to
their schools and instruct the young men of Greece, while those of
Rome might, as before, give their attention to the laws and the
magistrates.

XXIII. Cato acted thus, not as some writers imagine, from any private
quarrel with Karneades, but because he disliked the philosophy
altogether, and from a feeling of patriotism, regarded all Greek
literature and methods of education with hatred and contempt. He used
to say that Sokrates was a wordy and dangerous man, who endeavoured in
his own way to make himself supreme in Athens, by destroying the best
of the national customs and teaching the citizens to hold opinions at
variance with the laws. He ridiculed Isokrates as a teacher of
rhetoric, saying that his disciples stayed with him so long learning
their profession, that they were only able to practice what they had
learned in the court where Minos sat as judge in the next world. In
his endeavours to dissuade his son from the study of Greek literature,
he abused the privileges of old age so far as to utter a prophecy that
the Romans would ruin their empire by too intimate an acquaintance
with the arts of Greece. Time, however, has proved this to be a mere
empty slander, seeing that since then Rome has risen to a wonderful
height of power and glory, and yet is thoroughly familiar with Greek
writings and studies. Cato not only disliked the Greek philosophers,
but also looked with suspicion on the Greek physicians who then
practised at Rome. He had heard some story about Hippokrates, who,
when the king of Persia offered him a large sum of money if he would
come to Persia, answered that he never would give his services to
barbarians who were the enemies of Greece. Cato used to say that all
Greek physicians had sworn an oath to act like Hippokrates, and warned
his son never to have any dealings with any of them. He himself had a
book full of recipes, according to which he used to physick and
regulate the diet of any who fell sick in his house, being careful
never to allow the patient to fast, but making him eat salad, with
ducks, pigeons, and hares, which he said were light food, and suitable
for sick persons, except that it often happened that those who ate of
them suffered from nightmares. He used to declare that by following
this regimen, he kept both himself and all his household in perfect
health.

XXIV. He seems to have been justly rewarded for his quackery, for he
lost both his wife and his son by sickness. He himself, however,
being of an iron constitution, made a second marriage, in spite of his
advanced age, being led into it by the following circumstances. After
the death of his wife he arranged a marriage between his son and the
daughter of Æmilius Paulus, who was the sister of Scipio. He himself
meanwhile solaced himself by an intrigue with a maid-servant who
visited him by stealth. However, in a small house with a
daughter-in-law in it this could not be kept secret; and one day when
this woman was insolently swaggering into his father's bedchamber,
young Cato was observed by the old man to glance at her with bitter
hatred and then turn away in disgust. As soon as Cato perceived that
his conduct vexed his children, he said not a word, but went into the
forum with his friends, as was his wont. Here one Salonius, who was
one of his under-secretaries, met him and began to pay his respects to
him, when Cato asked him in a loud voice whether he had provided a
husband for his daughter. On the man's replying that he had not, and
would not presume to do so without consulting him, Cato replied,
"Well, I, by Jupiter, have found a very suitable person to marry her,
unless his age be any objection: for he is very passable in all
respects except that he is very old." As Salonius upon this bade him
carry out his intention and marry the girl to whomsoever he pleased,
seeing that she was his client[31] and he was her patron, Cato without
a moment's delay told him that he wished to marry the girl himself.
This proposal at first, as might be expected, astonished the
secretary, who had thought that a man at Cato's time of life was very
unlikely to marry, and had never dreamed that his humble family would
be allied with a house which could boast of consulates and triumphs;
but as he saw that Cato was in earnest he gladly accepted his offer.
While the preparations for the marriage were in progress, young Cato,
taking his relatives with him, went and inquired of his father whether
he had reproached or annoyed him in any way, that he was putting a
mother-in-law over him. Cato at this question cried out aloud, "Hush,
my son; I approve of all that you have done, and find no fault with
you: I only desire to leave behind me more sons of my race, and more
citizens to serve the state." It is said that this remark was first
made by Peisistratus, the despot of Athens, when, although he had sons
grown up, he married Timonassa of Argos, by whom we are told that he
had two sons, Iophon and Thessalus. Cato also had a son by his second
marriage, whom he named Salonius after his mother. His eldest son died
during his prætorship. Cato often mentions him in his writings as
having been a brave and good man, but is said to have borne his loss
with philosophic resignation, and to have taken as keen an interest in
politics as before. He did not, as was afterwards done by Lucius
Lucullus or Metellus Pius, abandon public life when he grew old, and
think that it was a burden to take part in politics; still less did he
imitate Scipio Africanus, who some years before had proudly turned his
back on the people who grudged him the glory he had won, and spent the
rest of his life in ease and retirement. Some one is said to have told
Dionysius of Syracuse that an absolute monarchy is the best thing for
a man to die in, and so Cato seemed to think that political life was
the best for him to grow old in, while he amused himself in his
leisure moments by writing and farming.

XXV. He compiled works on various subjects, especially on history.
Farming he applied himself to when very young, on account of his
poverty, for he himself tells us that he had only two sources of
income, farming and frugality. In later life he derived both amusement
and instruction from watching the operations of agriculture, and he
has written a farmer's manual, in which there is even an account of
how to cook cakes and preserve fruits, so desirous was he to show a
thorough knowledge of every subject. His table was never so well
served as when he was in the country; for he used to invite all his
friends and acquaintances from the neighbourhood, and make himself
very agreeable to them, as he was a pleasant companion not only to men
of his own age, but also to the young, having in the course of his
long life seen and heard from others much that was interesting and
curious. He regarded the table as the best means of forming
friendships, and when dining used to praise the good without stint,
but never would allow the names of worthless men to be mentioned,
either by way of praise or blame, at his entertainments.

XXVI. The last of his political acts is said to have been the
destruction of Carthage. This was actually brought to pass by Scipio
the Younger, but it was chiefly owing to the counsels of Cato that the
war was begun. His reason for insisting on its destruction was this.
He was sent on a mission to Africa to investigate the grounds of a
quarrel which existed between the Carthaginians and Masinissa, the
king of the Numidians. Masinissa had always been the friend of Rome,
whereas the Carthaginians, after their defeat by Scipio, had been
subjected to hard conditions, having lost their sovereignty over the
neighbouring tribes, and having been compelled to pay a large sum as
tribute to Rome. Cato, however, found the city, not, as the Romans
imagined it to be, crushed by its recent overthrow, but full of young
men, overflowing with wealth, well provided with arms and munitions of
war, and, as may be expected, full of warlike spirit. He concluded
that it was no time for the Romans to arbitrate about the grievances
of Masinissa and his Numidians, but that, unless they at once
destroyed a city which bore them an undying hatred and which had
recovered its strength in an incredibly short space of time, they
would have as much to fear from Carthage as ever. He quickly returned
home, and pointed out to the Senate that the former defeats and
misfortunes suffered by the Carthaginians had not really broken their
strength so much as they had dissipated their overweening
self-confidence, and that in the late war they had not lost so much in
strength as they had gained in experience and skill. Their present
difference with the Numidians was, he urged, merely a prelude to an
attack upon Rome, with which city they kept up the fiction of a peace
which would soon upon a suitable opportunity be exchanged for war.

XXVII. After these words it is said that Cato threw down in the senate
house some ripe figs which he had brought on purpose; and when the
senators admired their size and beauty, he remarked that "the country
which produced this fruit is only three days' sail distant from Rome."
Another and a more violent method of forcing the Romans to attack
them was his habit, when giving his opinion on any subject whatever,
to append the words, "And I also am of opinion that Carthage must he
destroyed." On the other hand, Publius Scipio, called Nasica, used to
end all his speeches with the words, "And I further am of opinion that
Carthage should be left alone." Scipio's reason for this was that he
perceived that the lower classes in Rome, elated by success, were
becoming difficult for the Senate to manage, and practically forced
the State to adopt whatever measures they chose. He thought that to
have this fear of Carthage kept constantly hanging over them would be
a salutary check upon the insolence of the people, and he thought that
although Carthage was too weak to conquer the Romans, yet that it was
too strong to be despised by them. Cato, on the other hand, thought it
a dangerous thing that, at a time when the Romans were giddy and drunk
with power, they should leave in existence a city which always had
been important, and which now, sobered by defeat, was biding its time
and lying in wait for a favourable opportunity to avenge itself. He
argued that it was better to set the Romans free from any fear of
foreign states, in order that they might be able to devote themselves
uninterruptedly to the task of political reform.

These are said to have been Cato's reasons for urging his countrymen
to begin the third and last Punic war. He died as soon as the war was
begun, leaving a prophecy that it would be finished by a young man who
was then serving as military tribune, and who had given remarkable
proofs of courage and generalship. Cato, on hearing of his exploits is
said to have quoted Homer's line--

"He alone has solid wisdom; all the rest are shadows vain."

This opinion Scipio soon confirmed by his actions.

Cato left one son by his second wife, who, as has been said, was named
Salonius, and one grandson, the child of his eldest son who was dead.
Salonius died during his prætorship, but his son Marcus became consul.
This man was the grandfather of Cato the Philosopher, who was one of
the foremost men of his day in courage and ability.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 31: On the nature of these relations, see 'Smith's Dict. of
Ant.,' s.v.]

COMPARISON OF ARISTEIDES AND CATO.

Now that we have related all the important events of each of these
men's lives, it will be seen that the points in which they differ are
very trifling when compared with those in which they agree. If,
however, we are to take each of their qualities separately, as one
would in comparing two speeches or two pictures, we observe that they
both agree in having begun life in a humble station, and having won
political distinction and power by sheer ability and force of
character. It is true that Aristeides rose to power at a period when
Athens was poor, and when the orators and generals whom he attacked
were men whose means were little superior to his own; for the men of
greatest incomes at that time were assessed as having five hundred
bushels of wet or dry produce a year, while the next class, that of
the knights, had three hundred, and the lowest, or those who could
afford to keep a yoke of oxen, had only two hundred. Cato, on the
other hand, came from an obscure village and a rustic mode of life,
and boldly launched himself upon the turbid sea of Roman politics,
although the days of Curius, Fabricius and Atilius were long past, and
Rome was not accustomed to find her magistrates and party leaders in
labouring men fresh from the plough or the workshop, but in men of
noble birth and great wealth, who canvassed extensively, and bribed
heavily; while the populace, insolent with the consciousness of power,
were growing ripe for a revolt against the governing class.

It was a very different thing for Aristeides to have only Themistokles
for an antagonist, a man of no birth or fortune (for it is said that
he only possessed between three and five talents when he first
embarked on politics) and for Cato to contend for the mastery with
men like Scipio Africanus, Sergius Galba, and Titus Quintius
Flamininus, with nothing to help him but his eloquent voice and his
good cause.

II. Furthermore, Aristeides, both at Marathon and at Platæa, acted as
general with nine colleagues, while Cato was elected one of the two
consuls and afterwards one of the two censors, though there were many
other candidates for both offices. Aristeides never conspicuously
distinguished himself, as the credit of the victory at Marathon
belongs to Miltiades, and that of Salamis to Themistokles, while
Herodotus tells us that Pausanias obtained the most glorious success
of all at Platæa, and even the second place is disputed with
Aristeides by Sophanes, Ameinias, Kallimachus, and Kynægyrus, all of
whom won great glory in those battles. On the other hand, Cato not
only when consul gained the greatest credit, both by his wise conduct,
and his personal prowess in the Spanish war, but, when at Thermopylæ
he was acting as tribune under another person's command as consul,
contributed mainly to winning the victory by his flank movement, by
which he established himself in the rear of Antiochus while that
prince was intent upon the enemy in his front. This victory, which was
so manifestly due to Cato, had the important result of driving the
Asiatic troops out of Greece back to their own country, and so of
preparing the way for Scipio's subsequent invasion of Asia.

Neither of them were ever defeated in battle, but in political matters
Aristeides was overcome by his rival Themistokles, who drove him into
exile by ostracism, while Cato held his own against all the greatest
and most influential men in Rome to the end of his life without once
being overthrown by them. He was often impeached, and always
acquitted, while he frequently succeeded in his impeachments of
others, using, both as a bulwark to defend himself and as a weapon to
attack others, his power of speaking in public, which indeed is a
quality more to be relied upon than good fortune to protect a man from
suffering wrong. Antipater, in the account which he wrote of the
philosopher Aristotle after his death, observes that besides his
other qualities and accomplishments this man had the power of
persuasion.

III. It is generally admitted that political virtue is the highest to
which a man can aspire, and of this, most think domestic virtue to be
a very important part; for as a city is merely a collection of houses,
the public virtue of the state must be increased if it contain many
well-regulated households. Lykurgus, when he banished silver and gold
from Sparta, and gave his countrymen useless iron money, did not wish
to discourage good household management among them, but he removed the
dangerous seductions of wealth out of their reach, in order that they
all might enjoy a sufficiency of what was useful and necessary. He
saw, what no other legislator appears to have seen, that the real
danger to a commonwealth arises from the poor and desperate rather
than from the excessively rich.

Now we have seen that Cato was as well able to manage his household as
to govern the state; for he improved his fortune and became a teacher
of household management and husbandry to others, by collecting much
useful information on these matters. On the other hand, Aristeides
made his poverty a reproach to justice, which by his example was made
to seem a ruinous virtue which brought men to want, and was totally
useless to those who practised it. Yet the poet Hesiod, when
encouraging men to act justly and manage their household affairs well,
blames idleness as the origin of injustice, and the same idea is well
stated in Homer's lines:--

"Work was never my delight,
    Nor household cares, that breed up children bright;
    But ever loved I ships with banks of oars,
    And arrows keen, and weapons for the wars,"

where we see that the same men neglect their duties at home, and gain
their living by injustice and piracy abroad. The physicians tell us
that oil is most useful, outwardly used, and most harmful when taken
inwardly; but it is not true of the just man that he is most useful to
his friends, but useless to himself. It seems to me to be a blot on
Aristeides' fame, if it be true that he could not even provide money
for his daughters' dowry or for his own funeral expenses. The family
of Cato for four generations, supplied Rome with prætors and consuls,
for his grandchildren, and their children too, all rose to the highest
offices in the state; while the hopeless poverty of Aristeides, though
he was the foremost man of his time in Greece, reduced some of his
family to the disreputable profession of interpreting dreams, and
forced others to live on public charity, putting it quite out of their
power to emulate the glorious actions of their ancestor.

IV. Some, indeed, may dispute this; for it is true that poverty is no
disgrace in itself, but only when it is a proof of indolence,
extravagance, or folly. The poverty of a laborious, upright, temperate
statesman combines well with his other virtues, and shows true
greatness of mind: for a man whose attention is given to little
things, can never succeed in doing great ones; nor can a man help
others if he is in need of help himself. A statesman requires, not
wealth, but contentment, in order that his attention may not be
diverted from public affairs by his own cravings for useless luxuries.
God alone is entirely without wants, and we approach nearest to the
divine ideal when we can reduce our wants to the fewest possible. Just
as a healthy man requires neither excess of clothing or of food, so a
man's life and that of his family, if properly regulated, can be
maintained at a trifling cost. His income, however, must exactly tally
with his requirements; for we cannot call that man contented who earns
much, and spends little. He is a foolish man if he troubles himself to
amass what he cannot enjoy; while he must be a miserable man if he is
able to enjoy the use of wealth, and yet through meanness of spirit
forbids himself its use.

I would willingly put this question to Cato: "If we ought to enjoy our
wealth, why do you make a virtue of simplicity of living when you are
a rich man? If, on the other hand, it is a noble thing, as no doubt it
is, to eat common bread, to drink the same wine as our servants and
farm labourers do, and not to want fine clothes or comfortable houses,
then Aristeides and Epameinondus, Manius Curius and Caius Fabricius
were to be applauded for their neglect of the wealth, whose use they
rejected." Surely it was not necessary for a man who thought turnips
made a delicious meal, and who used to boil them himself while his
wife baked the bread, to write so much about how to save a penny, and
how a man might most quickly make a fortune. The great advantage of
simplicity and contentment is, that it prevents our wishing for
superfluities, or even thinking about them. Aristeides, when cited as
a witness during the trial of Kallias, is said to have observed that
those who were poor against their will, ought to be ashamed of it, but
that those who, like himself, were poor from their own choice, gloried
in their poverty. It would be absurd to suppose that the poverty of
Aristeides was not voluntary, when, without doing any criminal act, he
might by stripping the body of one dead Persian, or by plundering one
tent, have made himself a rich man. But enough of this.

V. As to their campaigns, those of Cato added but little to the
already vast empire of Rome, while Aristeides was present at Marathon,
Salamis, and Platæa, the most glorious of all Grecian victories. We
cannot compare Antiochus with Xerxes, nor the destruction of the walls
of the Spanish cities by Cato, with the tremendous slaughter of the
barbarians by the Greeks, both on sea and land. Aristeides was present
at every action of importance, although he gave up his share of glory
and rewards, even as he did with gold and silver, to those who needed
them more than himself. I cannot blame Cato for always glorifying
himself and claiming the first place for himself, although he says in
one of his books that it is absurd for a man either to praise or to
blame himself; still I think that he who does not even wish for the
praises of others, is a more perfect character than he who is always
exalting himself. An indifference to popular applause does much to
soften the bitterness of political controversy, while on the other
hand a love of distinction often leads men to be ill-natured and
spiteful to others, a fault which Aristeides entirely avoided, and to
which Cato was peculiarly liable. Aristeides saved Athens by
supporting the authority of Themistokles on several critical
occasions, and even acting as his subordinate; while Cato by his
opposition, nearly ruined Scipio's famous expedition to Carthage, in
which he defeated the hitherto invincible Hannibal. Nor did he cease
his intrigues against Scipio until by calumnious and false accusations
he drove him out of Rome, and stigmatized his brother with the
disgraceful charge of embezzling the public money.

VI. Self-denial, upon which Cato has bestowed such lavish praise, was
practised in its purest and brightest form by Aristeides, while Cato
seems to have forfeited all claim to this virtue by his unsuitable and
unseasonable second marriage. It could not be to his honour, when he
was of such a great age, to marry the daughter of his own servant, a
man who acted as a public clerk, and to bring her into the house to
act as mother-in-law to his son, who was now himself grown up and
married. Whether he acted thus from natural inclination, or to spite
his son for his behaviour about his mistress, the marriage and the
motives which led to it are equally discreditable to him. The
sarcastic explanation of it which he gave to his son is utterly
untrue; for had he wished to beget other children as noble as his son,
he ought to have married a well-born lady at once, and not to have
been satisfied with a low intrigue until it was detected, and then to
have chosen as his father-in-law, the man whom he could most easily
influence, rather than some one whose alliance would bring him honour
and advantage.

LIFE OF PHILOPŒMEN.

Philopœmen, imagining that his knowledge of war on land would enable
him to fight equally well at sea, learned by experience how greatly
practice assists men's courage, and how much their strength is
increased by being trained to use it. Not only was he worsted in a
sea-fight through inexperience, but having selected an old ship, which
had once been a famous vessel, but now was forty years old, she leaked
so much as to endanger the lives of those on board. After the action,
finding that the enemy despised him, as though his ships had been
entirely driven from the sea, and that they were ostentatiously
besieging Gythium, he sailed straightway thither and found them quite
unprepared, and with their discipline relaxed in consequence of their
victory. He landed his men at night, burned the enemy's tents, and
slew many of them. A few days afterwards, being surprised by Nabis in
a mountainous spot, while all the Achæans gave themselves up for lost,
despairing of extricating themselves from such a difficult position,
Philopœmen, after a short survey of the country, proved that strategy
is the greatest of military qualities. He quietly and steadily changed
his front, manœuvred his army out of its disadvantageous position,
attacked the enemy, and completely routed them. Perceiving that the
fugitives did not make for the city, but scattered themselves all over
the country, which was hilly and wooded, full of torrents and
precipices, and impassable for cavalry, he made no pursuit, but
encamped before dark. As he conjectured that the enemy after their
rout would straggle back into the city by twos and threes under cover
of the darkness, he concealed many of the Achæans, armed with daggers,
in the rough ground near the city. By this stratagem Nabis's force
suffered great losses, for as they did not retreat in a body, but each
man as best he could, they fell into their foemen's hands at the city
gate like birds into a snare.

XV. Philopœmen gained so much glory by these exploits, and was so much
honoured by the Greeks wherever he appeared in public, that he roused
the jealousy of Flamininus, who thought that he, a consul of Rome, was
worthier of respect than a mere Arcadian, while he had moreover done
much more for Greece, having by one proclamation restored those
liberties of which Philip and his Macedonians had deprived it.
Flamininus put an end to the war with Nabis, who was shortly
afterwards assassinated by the Ætolians. As this event threw Sparta
into disorder, Philopœmen seized the opportunity, marched thither with
an army, and partly by persuasion, partly by force, prevailed upon the
city to join the Achæan league. This wonderfully raised his fame
throughout Greece, that he should have won over so famous and powerful
a city, for Sparta formed a most important member of the league. He
also gained the good will of the Lacedæmonian nobles, who hoped that
he would protect their newly-won liberty. They sold the house and
property of Nabis, and decreed that the money, amounting to a hundred
and twenty talents, should be presented to him by a deputation. On
this occasion Philopœmen showed himself to be a man of real virtue.
At the interview none of the Spartans liked to propose to him to
receive the money, but they excused themselves, and made his own
especial friend Timolaus undertake to do this. Timolaus, however, when
he reached Megalopolis, and living in the house of Philopœmen had an
opportunity of observing the noble simplicity of his character and his
lofty integrity, in the familiar intercourse of private life, dared
not mention the bribe, but gave some other excuse for his visit and
returned home. He was sent a second time, with the same result. On a
third visit he with great hesitation broached the subject. Philopœmen
listened to him without anger, and sent him back to the Spartans with
the advice that they should not corrupt their friends, whose services
they could obtain gratis, but keep their money to bribe those who
endeavoured to countermine their city in the public assembly of the
Achæan league, as, if muzzled in this way, they would cease to oppose
them. It was better, he added, to restrain the freedom of speech of
their enemies than that of their friends. So uncorrupt was he, and
inaccessible to bribes.

XVI. When Diophanes, the commander-in-chief of the Achæans,
endeavoured to punish the Lacedæmonians for a change in their policy,
and they by their resistance threw the whole of Peloponnesus into
confusion, Philopœmen tried to act as mediator, and to soothe the
anger of Diophanes, pointing out to him that at a time when the Romans
and king Antiochus with enormous forces were about to make Greece
their battle ground, a general ought to direct all his thoughts to
their movements, and to avoid any internal disturbance, willingly
accepting any apologies from those who did wrong. But as Diophanes
took no notice of him, but together with Flamininus invaded Laconia,
Philopœmen, disregarding the exact letter of the law, performed a most
spirited and noble action. He hurried to Sparta, and, though only a
private man, shut its gates in the faces of the commander-in-chief of
the Achæans and of the Roman consul, put an end to the revolutionary
movement there, and prevailed upon the city to rejoin the Achæan
league. Some time afterwards however, we are told by Polybius that
Philopœmen, when commander-in-chief, having some quarrel with the
Lacedæmonians, restored the exiles to the city, and put to death
eighty, or, according to Aristokrates, three hundred and fifty
Spartans. He also pulled down the walls of Sparta, and annexed a large
portion of its territory to Megalopolis, while he forced all those
persons who had been created citizens of Sparta under the rule of the
despots to leave the city and proceed to Achæa, except three hundred.
These, because they refused to obey him and leave Lacedæmon he sold
for slaves, and with the money, as a wanton insult, built a public
portico in Megalopolis. Moreover, in his wrath against the
Lacedæmonians, he did them a most cruel wrong, for he abolished the
Lycurgean system of education and forced them to educate their
children like those of the Achæans, because he saw that they never
would be humble-minded as long as they lived under the discipline of
Lycurgus. Thus was the haughty city of Sparta brought so low by its
misfortunes as to permit Philopœmen to cut, as it were, its very
sinews, and render it tame and crushed. Afterwards, however, the
citizens obtained permission from Rome to retire from the Achæan
confederation, upon which they restored their original constitution as
far as their great disasters permitted.

XVII. When the Romans were fighting king Antiochus in Greece,
Philopœmen was in a private station, but, seeing Antiochus lying idly
at Chalkis, wasting his time in unseasonable courtships and weddings,
while his Syrian troops, in great disorder and without officers to
control them, were scattered through the various Greek cities, living
in riotous debauchery, he was vexed at not being elected commander in
chief, and said that he envied the Romans their victory. "I," said he,
"if I had been in command, would have cut off the whole of Antiochus's
army in the taverns."

After the defeat of Antiochus the Romans began to tighten their hold
upon Greece, and to absorb the Achæan league. Many of the popular
leaders took their side, and the growing power of Rome was fated by
the divine blessing before long to become absolute in Greece.
Philopœmen, like a skilful pilot, struggling against a rough sea, was
often compelled to yield and give way for a time, yet as he was
utterly opposed to the Romans he did his best to induce the most
influential men to defend the liberties of Greece. Aristænetus of
Megapolis, a man of great influence with the Achæans, who urged them
in the public assembly not to oppose or to thwart the Romans in
anything, was listened to by Philopœmen for some time in silence,
until at length he was moved to exclaim, "My good sir, why be in such
a hurry to behold the end of Greece?" When Manius the Roman consul had
conquered Antiochus, he begged the Achæans to permit the Lacedæmonian
exiles to return. Titus Flamininus seconded this request, but
Philopœmen opposed it; not because he had any quarrel with the exiles,
but because he wished their restoration to be effected by himself and
the Achæans, of their own free will, not as a favour to Flamininus and
the Romans. Afterwards, when commander-in-chief, he himself restored
them. Thus did his high spirit make him impatient of control and
authority.

XVIII. When he was in his seventieth year, and eighth term of office
as commander-in-chief, he might reasonably expect to finish not only
his year of office, but also the rest of his life in peace; for just
as in human bodies as their strength wastes away the violence of their
diseases abates, so in the Greek states as their power failed their
quarrels gradually ceased. However some Nemesis overtook him, as it
does a too successful athlete just at the termination of his course.
It is said that when some persons in society were praising a man who
was thought to be a good general, Philopœmen said, "How can you think
that man worth consideration, who was taken by his enemy alive."

XX. While they were acting thus, Deinokrates feared that delay might
save Philopœmen's life. Wishing therefore to be beforehand with the
Achæans, as soon as night came on, and the greater part of the
Messenians had retired, he opened the prison and sent into it a public
slave with a draught of poison, ordering him to stand by Philopœmen
until he had drunk it. Philopœmen was lying down wrapped in his cloak,
not asleep, but full of trouble and distress of mind. When he saw the
light and the slave with the poison standing beside him, he, with
great difficulty on account of his weakness, raised himself into a
sitting posture. He then took the cup into his hand, and inquired
whether he knew anything about the knights, especially about one
Lykortas. When the slave answered that most of them had escaped, he
nodded his head, looked kindly upon him, and answered, "You tell me
good news, if we are not all unfortunate." He uttered no other word,
but drank the poison and laid down again. In his weak condition he was
unable to offer any resistance to the operations of the drug, and died
immediately.

XXI. When the Achæan cities heard of his death, they went into a
general mourning for him. The men of military age assembled at
Megalopolis without delay, chose Lykortas as their leader, invaded the
Messenian territory, and ravaged it until the Messenians came to their
senses and made terms with the Achæans. Deinokrates escaped his
merited fate by suicide, as did those who had advised that Philopœmen
should be put to death, while those who had advised that he should be
tortured were themselves reserved for a death of torture by Lykortas.
They burned his body and collected the ashes into an urn, not
carelessly, but mingling a sort of triumphal pomp with his funeral
procession. There one might see men crowned with garlands but weeping
at the same time, and leading along his enemies in chains. The urn
itself, which was scarcely to be seen for the garlands and ribbons
with which it was covered, was carried by Polybius, the son of the
Achæan commander-in-chief, accompanied by the noblest of the Achæans.
The soldiers followed in complete armour, with caparisoned horses, not
cast down, but yet too sad to feel any pride in their victory. As they
passed through the towns and villages on their way the inhabitants
came out as if to welcome him on his return from a successful
campaign, laid their hands on his urn, and joined in the procession to
Megalopolis. When here the old men, women, and children joined them, a
wail of distress ran through the whole army for the unhappy city which
was mourning for its hero, and which thought itself to have lost, by
his death, the first place in Greece. He was buried with great honour,
as we may well believe, and round his tomb the Messenian captives wore
stoned to death. Many statues were made of him, and many honours voted
to him by the Greek cities, which afterwards during that unfortunate
time for Greece when Corinth was destroyed, a Roman proposed to
destroy, accusing Philopœmen, as if he had been yet alive, of being
always an enemy to the Romans. But after Polybius had answered this
contemptible fellow, neither the consul Mummius nor his lieutenants
would suffer him to deface and take away the honours done in memory of
so famous and worthy a man, although he had frequently offered great
opposition both to Flamininus and to Manius. They distinguished
properly between honour and expediency, rightly thinking that men
should reward those who benefit them, but that the brave should always
be honoured by all brave men. Thus much have I to tell about
Philopœmen.

LIFE OF TITUS FLAMININUS.

Those who wish to know what Titus Quintius Flamininus, whom we have
selected as a parallel to Philopœmen, was like, may see his brazen
statue in Rome, which stands beside the great statue of Apollo from
Carthage, opposite to the Circus, with a Greek inscription upon it.
His temper is said to have been warm, both in love and in anger,
though he was ever moderate and placable in inflicting punishment,
while he was never weary in conferring favours, and was always eager
to help those upon whom he had bestowed some benefit, preserving and
protecting them as though they were the most precious of his
possessions. Being ambitious and eager to distinguish himself, he
wished to take the leading part in everything, and consequently
preferred those who hoped to receive to those who were able to confer
favours, because the former were his assistants and the latter his
rivals in the struggle for honour.

He received a military training, being born at a time when Rome was
engaged in most important wars, and when young men learned how to act
as officers not by theory but by actual service in the field. He first
served as military tribune under the consul Marcellus in the war with
Hannibal. Marcellus perished in an ambuscade, but Titus was made
governor of Tarentum after its recapture, and of the surrounding
territory. In this government, he won as great a reputation for
justice as for courage, so that when the Romans sent colonists to the
two cities of Narnia and Cossa, he was appointed to lead them and act
as founder of the colonies.

II. This so elated him that he at once aspired to the consulship,
passing over all the usual steps of Ædile, Tribune, or Prætor, by
which young men generally rose to that office. When the day of
election arrived, he appeared with a strong following of devoted
partisans from those two towns. When the tribunes of the people,
Fulvius and Manius, came forward and protested against a young man
taking the highest office in the state by storm, contrary to the laws,
and being as it were uninitiated in the very elements of the
constitution, the Senate referred the matter to the votes of the
people, who elected him consul together with Sextus Ælius, although he
was not yet thirty years old. In casting lots for provinces the war
with Philip of Macedon fell to his share, greatly to the advantage of
the Romans, because in that war they needed a general who would deal
with the enemy not entirely by main force, but also win them over by
persuasion and diplomacy. The kingdom of Macedonia was amply
sufficient for Philip, if he only fought once with the Romans; but to
maintain the cost of a long war, to supply his troops, and afford him
necessary resources, the co-operation of Greece was essential to him.
Unless therefore Greece could be detached from his alliance, the war
could not be decided by a single battle. Greece at this time had been
brought but little into contact with the Romans, who then for the
first time interfered in her politics. Unless, therefore, the Roman
general had been a man of high character, willing to act by diplomacy
rather than by war, and combining affability of address with a strict
sense of justice, the Greeks would have been unwilling to throw off
their allegiance to their former masters in order to place themselves
under the new and untried dominion of Rome. Of these honourable traits
in Titus's character many instances will be found in his acts.

III. He learned that his predecessors, Sulpicius[32] and Publius[33],
had both invaded Macedonia when the season was far advanced, had begun
warlike operations too late, and had failed because Philip occupied
the strong places in the country and harassed them by constant attacks
upon their communications and foraging parties. Flamininus did not
wish to follow their example, and, after wasting a year at home in
the enjoyment of the consular dignity, and in taking part in the
politics of Rome, to set out late in the year to begin his campaign,
although by this means he might have extended his command over two
years, by acting as consul in the first, and carrying on the war as
proconsul during the second. He preferred to throw the weight of his
power as consul into the conduct of the war, cared not to display the
insignia of his office at Rome, but obtained from the Senate the
appointment of his brother Lucius to the command of the fleet which
was to co-operate with him, took as the nucleus of his army three
thousand of the strongest of those veterans who under Scipio had
beaten Hasdrubal in Spain and Hannibal in Africa, and safely crossed
over with them into Epirus. Here he found Publius, with his army,
watching that of Philip, which held the passes near the river Apsus,
but unable to effect anything on account of the enemy being so
strongly posted. After taking over the army from Publius, whom he
superseded in its command, he reconnoitred the position. Its strength
is as great as that of the vale of Tempe, although it wants the lovely
meadows and groves of trees for which the latter is celebrated. The
river Apsus runs in a deep ravine between vast and lofty mountains,
like the Peneus in appearance and swiftness, and beside it, at the
foot of the mountains, runs one narrow and rocky path, along which it
is difficult for an army to proceed even if unmolested, and utterly
impossible if it be held by an enemy.

IV. Titus was advised by some to turn Philip's flank, marching through
the Dassaretid country along the Lykus, which would offer no such
difficulties; but he feared to march far from the coast lest, like his
predecessors, he should become entangled in a country which could
furnish no supplies, be unable to force Philip to fight, and be
obliged to retreat to the sea again from want of the means of
subsistence. He determined to force his way through the mountains in
front, and as these were held by Philip with his main body, the
phalanx, his flanks being secured by archers and light armed troops,
skirmishes took place between him and the Romans daily, with
considerable loss on both sides, but without any result, until some of
the natives of the country informed him of a path, neglected by the
enemy, by which they undertook to lead his army, and on the third day
at the latest to place it upon the heights. As a guarantee of their
good faith they referred the Romans to Charops, the chief of the
Epirot tribes, who was friendly to the Romans, and co-operated with
them secretly, being afraid of Philip. Titus trusting in this man's
word sent one of the military tribunes with four thousand infantry and
three hundred cavalry. They were guided by these peasants, who were
strictly guarded, and marched by night, resting by day in woods and
sheltered places: for the moon was full. Titus, after he had
despatched this force, rested his army, only skirmishing slightly with
the enemy lest they should entertain any suspicion, until the day upon
which the turning party was expected to appear on the summit of the
mountain range. On that morning he got his whole force under arms,
light and heavy armed alike, and dividing it into three parts himself
led one body in column up to the attack of the narrowest part of the
pass beside the river, while the Macedonians shot at him from above
and disputed every inequality of the ground, while on his right and
left the other detachments likewise vigorously attacked the position.
The sun rose while they were thus engaged, and a light cloud of smoke,
not distinct, but like a mountain mist, rose from the captured
heights. It was unnoticed by the enemy, being behind their backs, but
kept the Romans, while they fought, in a state of hopeful excitement
and suspense. When however it grew thicker and blacker, and rising in
a cloud proved itself without doubt to be the looked-for signal, they
rushed forward with a shout and drove the enemy into their innermost
places of refuge, while those on the rocks above echoed their warlike
clamour.

VI. The whole of Greece came to terms with him without a struggle,
Thebes being the first city to send a deputation to welcome him as he
peacefully marched through Bœotia. It was Brachyllus who had kept the
Thebans loyal to Philip, but now they desired to show their admiration
and esteem for Flamininus, being, as they imagined, on terms of amity
with both parties. Titus received them with great courtesy, and walked
gently forwards with them, conversing with them and asking them
questions, until his soldiers, who were marching some distance behind,
came up with him. Then he walked into the city in the company of the
Thebans, not altogether to their satisfaction, although they did not
like to attempt to keep him out, as he was accompanied by a good many
soldiers. Yet, as if the town were not entirely at his mercy, he made
them a speech, urging them to side with the Romans, while King Attalus
spoke to the same effect, encouraging the Thebans to rally to the
Roman cause. Attalus, indeed, over-exerted himself in his speech,
considering his great age, and in consequence of a sudden dizziness or
faintness fell down in a fit. He was shortly afterwards conveyed by
sea to Asia Minor, and died there. However, the Bœotians accepted the
Roman alliance.

VII. Philip now sent an embassy to Rome; and Flamininus also sent
thither to beg the Senate to allow him to retain his office of consul,
in case they should continue the war, or if they decided otherwise, to
permit him to have the honour of concluding a peace with Philip; for
his ambitious spirit could not endure to be superseded by another
commander. His friends succeeded in obtaining the rejection of
Philip's demands, and his own continuance in office. As soon as he
received this intelligence, he started, full of hope, to attack Philip
in Thessaly, with an army of more than twenty-six thousand men, of
which the Ætolians supplied six thousand infantry and four hundred
cavalry. The army of Philip was of nearly equal numbers, and they
began to march towards one another until they both drew near the city
of Skotussa, where they determined to fight a decisive battle. When
the two armies found themselves so near each other they felt no fear,
as one might have expected, but each was confident of victory. The
Romans were eager for the honour of overcoming the Macedonians, who
had gained such glory under Alexander the Great; while the
Macedonians, admitting the Romans to be very different soldiers to the
Persians, swelled with pride at the thought that if they could conquer
them, they would prove their king Philip to be even more invincible
than Alexander himself. Titus also encouraged his soldiers to quit
them like men, pointing out that they were about to fight in Greece, a
noble theatre in which to display deeds of daring, and against worthy
antagonists; while Philip, either by chance, or not noticing what he
was doing in his haste, mounted upon a large sepulchre outside his
camp, and from it began to make the usual speech to his men to
encourage them for the coming struggle, but at length observing the
evil omen was much disheartened by it, broke off in confusion, and
would not fight that day.

VIII. On the following morning about dawn, as the night had been warm
and damp, the whole plain was covered with fog, and a thick mist
poured down from the neighbouring hills; which rendered it impossible
to distinguish any object. The parties which were sent out by each
army to reconnoitre fell in with one another and fought near the place
called Kynoskephalæ, that is, Dogs' Heads, which is so named because a
number of small hills near together have something of this appearance.
In the combat, as usually happens in such rough ground, each side
alternately had the advantage, and as each gave way they were
reinforced from the respective camps. Now the fog lifted, and the two
commanders resolved upon a general engagement. Philip's right wing, on
which the phalanx charged down-hill with all its weight, was
victorious, the Romans being unable to stand before that hedge of
spears, or break through that closely-locked array of shields. But on
the left the Macedonians were unable to maintain their line, because
of the inequalities of the ground, and Titus, seeing that his left was
hopelessly routed, rode quickly to his own right, and suddenly
attacked the enemy, who, because of the uneven nature of the ground,
were unable to form their phalanx with its deep ranks, in which lies
the peculiar strength of that order of battle, while the soldiers of
which it is composed are armed in an unwieldy fashion which renders
them helpless in a hand-to-hand fight. For the Macedonian phalanx[34]
is like some huge beast of invincible strength so long as it remains
one body, close locked together in serried ranks; but when broken up
it loses even the advantage of each individual soldier's strength,
because of the fashion in which they are armed, as they can only act
together, not separately. When this body was routed some of the Romans
pursued the fugitives, while others charged the victorious Macedonians
in flank, soon forcing them to break up their array and fly in
confusion, throwing away their arms. There fell no less than eight
thousand of them, and five thousand were taken prisoners. The Ætolian
cavalry were blamed for letting Philip escape, because they betook
themselves to plundering the camp of the Macedonians even before the
Romans ceased their pursuit, so that on their return they found that
nothing had been left for them.

"Unshaped, unpolished, stands a gibbet strong,
    Upon this hill to hang Alkæus on."

But Titus, who felt that the eyes of Greece were upon him, was
wonderfully vexed by these incidents. For this reason he conducted the
operations which followed without in the least degree consulting the
Ætolians. They were angry at this neglect, and when Titus began
negotiations with Philip, and received an embassy from him to treat
for peace, they spread it abroad throughout Greece that Titus was
being bribed by Philip into making peace, when he had it in his power
to utterly cut off and destroy that power which first destroyed the
independence of Greece. Philip himself however put an end to this
suspicion, by placing himself and all his resources in the hands of
Titus and the people of Rome. So now Titus brought the war to a close.
He restored Philip to his kingdom of Macedonia, but forbade him to
interfere in the affairs of Greece. He also imposed upon him a fine of
a thousand talents, took away all but ten of his ships of war, and
sent one of his two sons, Demetrius, to Rome as a hostage for the
fulfilment of these conditions. In their making terms with Philip
Titus showed himself wise and provident: for Hannibal the
Carthaginian, who was at that time an exile, was already at the court
of King Antiochus, urging him to follow up his good fortune and
increase his empire. Antiochus had already been so successful as to
have gained the surname of 'the Great,' and was now aiming at
universal dominion. He especially intended to attack the Romans, and
unless Titus had foreseen this, and granted favourable terms of peace,
Philip would have been his ally, the two most powerful kings of the
age would have been arrayed against the Romans, and a struggle no less
important than that of Rome against Hannibal would have begun. As it
was, Titus interposed this peace between the two wars, finishing the
one before he began the other; by which means he took from one of the
kings his last, and from the other his first hope.

X. The ten commissioners, whom the Senate despatched to assist Titus
in settling the affairs of Greece, advised him to leave it free and
independent, only keeping garrisons in Corinth, Chalkis, and
Demetrias, for safety against Antiochus. Upon this the Ætolians threw
off all disguise, openly urged these cities to revolt, and called upon
Titus to loose the chains of Greece, as Philip was wont to call these
three cities. They asked the Greeks whether they were pleased at their
present bonds, which were heavier, though smoother than before; and
whether they still thought Titus to be their benefactor because he had
removed the fetters from the feet of Greece and fastened them round
her throat. Titus was much grieved at these imputations, and at length
by his representations induced the Senate to desist from its design of
placing garrisons in these three cities, in order that the liberty
which he was about to bestow upon Greece might be unclogged by any
conditions.

When the Isthmian games were being celebrated, a great number of
people were assembled in the arena witnessing the gymnastic contests,
as was natural now that wars had ceased throughout Greece, and the
people could attend their national festivals in safety. Proclamation
was now suddenly made by the sound of a trumpet that every man should
keep silence; and a herald coming forward into the midst of the
assembly announced that the Senate of Rome, and Titus Quintius their
consul and general, having overcome King Philip and the Macedonians,
did now henceforth give liberty to the Corinthians, Lokrians,
Phokians, Eubœans, Achæans of Phthia, Magnetes, Thessalians, and
Perrhæbians, with exemption from garrisons and tribute, and
permission to govern themselves by their hereditary laws. At first all
did not clearly hear the proclamation, and there was a disorderly
tumult in the assembly, as men wondered at the words, asked one
another their meaning, and called upon the herald to repeat them. But
when silence had again been obtained, and the herald, exerting his
voice to the utmost, repeated the proclamation, such a shout was
raised that it was heard as far as the sea coast, and all the
spectators rose from their seats, caring nothing more for the games,
but rushing with one accord to greet, with transports of delight, the
saviour and protector of Greece. On this occasion was observed what is
often mentioned as an example of the power of human voices; some
crows, which were flying over the racecourse at that moment, fell down
among the people. The reason of this is that the air is broken and cut
asunder by the vehemence and strength of the voices, so as not to have
its natural power to support the birds, which, fell down just as if
they were flying through a place where there was no air at all; unless
indeed it was the violence of the cry that struck the birds like a
shot, and so caused them to fall down dead. It may be also that the
air is driven round in whirlpools by such shouts, as we observe
happens in violent disturbances of the sea.

XI. As for Titus, unless he had escaped betimes when the assembly
broke up and rushed towards him, it is thought that he could not have
survived the pressure of so great a multitude. The crowd surrounded
his tent, shouting and applauding until nightfall, when they
dispersed: but as they went, if they met any of their kin, their
friends, or fellow-citizens, they kissed and embraced them for joy,
and then supped and made merry together. We may well think that they
had no other talk at the table but of the great and terrible wars
which Greece had fought for her liberty, and that nevertheless she
never had obtained so perfect and delightful a state of freedom as
that which had been won for her by other men's labours, almost without
any blood of her own being spilt. It is indeed rare to find bravery
and wisdom combined in any man, but it is even rarer to find a
perfectly just man. Agesilaus and Lysander, Nikias and Alkibiades
knew well how to wage war and win battles both by land and by sea, but
they never could make their victories yield any honourable benefit to
others, or true glory to themselves. Indeed with the exception of
Marathon and Salamis, Platæa and Thermopylæ, and the campaigns of
Kimon on the Eurymedon and in Cyprus, all the other battles of Greece
have been fought against herself, to bring about her slavery, and
every trophy has been a misfortune, and a monument of shame rather
than glory, arising chiefly from the rivalry between the leading
cities. Yet a strange nation, from which it was inconceivable that
Greece should receive any benefit, with scarcely any glimmering
embers, as it were, of a common origin, had nevertheless, with great
risk and hard fighting, rescued Greece from her harsh tyrants and
oppressors.

Indeed it was in the city of Corinth that this favour has twice been
bestowed upon the Greeks, for it was in Corinth that Titus made the
proclamation of which we have spoken, and Nero again, in our own time,
in nearly the same manner, during the Isthmian games, declared the
Greeks free and independent, except that Titus proclaimed it by means
of a herald, while Nero mounted upon a platform in the market place
and made the announcement himself. However, this took place long
afterwards.

XIII. Titus now began a war against that most hateful and lawless of
despots, Nabis of Lacedæmon, but betrayed the confidence of the
Greeks; for when he had the opportunity of destroying him he would not
do so, but made terms with him, leaving Sparta in a shameful bondage.
Either he was afraid that if the war went on for any length of time
some new commander would be sent from Rome who would gain the credit
of it, or else he was jealous of the honours which were paid to
Philopœmen, who was by far the greatest warrior in Greece at that
period, and who surpassed himself in acts of bravery and strategy
during the campaign against Nabis. The homage which was paid
Philopœmen in all public assemblies by the Achæans vexed Flamininus,
who felt angry that a mere Arcadian, who had gained some credit as a
leader in obscure border warfare, should be treated with as much
respect as the Roman consul, who was acting as the protector of all
the peoples of Greece. The excuse which Titus himself made for
terminating the war was that he saw that the despot could not be
dethroned without causing great suffering to the other Spartans.
Though the Achæans passed many decrees in his honour he cared for none
of them except one gift which they bestowed upon him, which was as
follows. Many of the Romans who had been taken prisoners in the war
with Hannibal had been sold for slaves, and were in servitude in
different countries. In Greece there were twelve hundred of them, men
who were in any case much to be pitied for their misfortune, but
especially now, when as may be supposed, they met their sons,
brothers, and relations, who were free Roman soldiers, while they
themselves were slaves. Titus, though grieved at their lot, did not
take them forcibly from their owners, but the Achæans paid a ransom of
five minæ for each man, collected them into one body, and just as
Titus was about to set sail for home, presented them to him, so that
he left the scene of his glorious labours having received an
honourable reward, and one which well befitted so great and patriotic
a man, besides being the most glorious ornament of his triumph: for
these men of their own accord, like ordinary slaves who have been
emancipated, shaved their heads, put on felt skull caps,[35] and
followed in the train at his triumph.

XIV. A more splendid spectacle was afforded by the spoils of war, the
Greek helmets, Macedonian shields, and long sarissæ, or pikes used by
the phalanx, which were carried along in the procession. There was
also no inconsiderable sum of money, for Tuditanus tells us that in
this triumph there were displayed three thousand seven hundred and
thirteen pounds of gold coin, forty-three thousand two hundred and
seventy pounds of silver coin, and fourteen thousand five hundred and
fourteen gold coins of King Philip, besides the thousand talents which
he owed. These, however, the Romans, at the instance of Flamininus,
forgave him, and released his son who had been kept as a hostage for
their payment.

XV. When Antiochus entered Greece with a large naval and military
force, many of the Greek states joined him, especially the Ætolians,
who eagerly espoused his cause because of their old quarrel with Rome.
They gave out as a pretext for beginning the war, that they intended
to restore freedom to the Greeks, who required nothing of the sort,
being free already. This, however, was merely said because it was the
most plausible excuse for their conduct, for which they could not
assign any creditable reason. The Romans were much alarmed at the
importance of this insurrection. They sent Manius Acilius as consul
and commander-in-chief to conduct the war, and dispatched Titus
Flamininus on a diplomatic mission to the cities of Greece. The mere
sight of him confirmed the wavering loyalty of some of these states,
while his personal influence induced many which had taken the first
steps towards revolt, to return to their allegiance. Some few,
however, were hopelessly lost to the Roman cause, having been
previously won over by the Ætolians; yet, vexed and exasperated as he
was by their conduct, he took care, after the victory had been won,
that even these should not be destroyed. Antiochus, it is well known,
was defeated at Thermopylæ, and at once set sail for Asia Minor, while
the consul Manius besieged some of the Ætolian strongholds himself,
and arranged for others to be taken by King Philip of Macedon. But
when the towns in Dolopia, Magnesia, and Aperantia were being
despoiled by Philip, and the consul Manius had taken Heraklea and was
besieging Naupaktus, an Ætolian fortress, Flamininus, pitying the
Greeks, left Peloponnesus and sailed to the consul at Naupaktus. At
first he reproached him with conquering Antiochus, and then allowing
Philip to reap all the advantages of his victory, and with wasting
time in besieging one city out of pique, while the Macedonians were
adding tribes and kingdoms to their empire. After this, as the
besieged, when they saw him, called upon him by name from the walls,
and stretched out their hands to him with tears and entreaties, he
made no answer to them but turned away and wept. Afterwards, however,
he reasoned with Manius, and persuaded him to put aside his
resentment, and to grant the Ætolians a truce, and time to send an
embassy to Rome to arrange reasonable terms of peace.

XVI. He was given most trouble of all by the petitions of the
Chalkidians to Manius for peace. These people were especially
obnoxious to the Romans because Antiochus, at the commencement of the
war, had married the daughter of a citizen of Chalkis. The match was
both unseasonable in point of time, and unequal in respect of age, as
he was an elderly man when he fell in love with the girl, who was the
daughter of one Kleoptolemus, and is said to have been of exceeding
beauty. This marriage caused the Chalkidians to become eager partizans
of King Antiochus, and even to offer him their city for his
headquarters during the war. After his defeat he retreated at once to
Chalkis, and then, taking his bride, his treasure, and his friends
with him, set sail for Asia. Manius at once marched upon Chalkis in a
rage, but Flaminius accompanied him, and by his entreaties at length
calmed and pacified him. The people of Chalkis, after this narrow
escape, dedicated the largest and most magnificent of all their public
buildings to Titus, the inscriptions on which may be read even at the
present day. "The people dedicate this gymnasium to Herakles and to
Titus." And on the other side of the road we read "The people dedicate
the Delphinium to Apollo and to Titus." Moreover even in our own times
a priest of Titus is chosen by show of hands, who offers sacrifice to
him. After the libations they sing a specially-written poem, too long
for quotation from which we extract the following verses:--

When Philip first met him to discuss terms of peace, and observed that
Titus had come with a large suite, while he was alone, Titus answered,
"You by your own act have made yourself lonely, by having killed all
your friends and relations." Once at Rome Deinokrates the Messenian
got drunk and danced in women's clothes, and on the next day begged
Titus to assist him in his design of detaching Messenia from the
Achæan league. Titus answered that he would consider the matter, but
that he wondered that a man engaged in such important designs should
sing and dance over his wine. When the ambassadors of Antiochus were
telling the Achæans the number of the king's army and were enumerating
the various forces of which it was composed under various
designations, Titus remarked that when dining with his host he had
been surprised at the variety of meats, and had expressed his wonder
as to how he had been able to obtain so many different kinds; but his
host informed him that it was all nothing more than pork disguised by
various sauces and cooked in various ways. "So now," continued he,
"men of Achæa, do not be alarmed at the power of Antiochus when you
hear these catalogues of spearmen and lance-bearers and foot-guards;
for they are all nothing more than Syrians disguised with different
kind of arms."

XVIII. After the pacification of Greece and the end of the war with
Antiochus, Flamininus was elected censor, which is the highest office
at Rome, and is as it were the goal of political life. His colleague
was Marcellus, the son of him that was five times consul. They ejected
from the Senate four men of no reputation, and admitted into it all
the candidates who were of free birth, being forced to do so by the
tribune of the people Terentius Culeo, who by his invectives against
the patricians had induced the people to pass a decree to that effect.

The two most prominent men in Rome at this time were Scipio Africanus
and Marcus Cato. Of these Titus appointed Scipio to be President of
the Senate, as being the first man in the state, but he quarrelled
with Cato for the following reason. Titus had a brother, Lucius
Flamininus, who was very unlike himself in disposition, being
licentious in his pleasures and careless of his reputation. He had a
favourite whom he always took with him even when he was in command of
an army or governor of a province. This boy once at a wine party said
that he was so greatly attached to Lucius, that he left a show of
gladiators before he had seen a man killed, to please him. Lucius,
delighted at this proof of affection, said, "That is easily remedied;
I will gratify your wish." He ordered a condemned criminal to be
brought, sent for the executioner, and bade him strike off the man's
head in the banquetting chamber. Valerius of Antium says that Lucius
did this to please a female, not a male favourite. But Livy says that
in Cato's own speech on the subject we are told that Lucius, to
gratify his favourite, slew with his own hand a Gaulish deserter who
came with his wife and children to the door, and whom he had himself
invited into the banquetting chamber. It is probable that Cato added
these particulars to exaggerate the horror of the story, for Cicero
the Orator, who gives the story in his book 'On Old Age,' and many
other writers, say that the man was not a deserter, but a criminal,
and condemned to death.

XIX. In consequence of this, Cato, when censor, removed Lucius from
the Senate, although he was of consular rank, and although his
degradation affected his brother as well as himself. Both of them now
presented themselves before the people poorly clad and in tears, and
appeared to be making a very reasonable demand in begging Cato to
state the grounds upon which he had cast such ignominy upon an
honourable family. Cato, however, not in the least affected by this,
came forward with his colleague and publicly demanded of Titus whether
he was acquainted with what happened at the banquet. When Titus
answered that he knew nothing of it, Cato related the circumstances,
challenging Lucius to contradict him if he spoke untruly. As Lucius
remained silent, the people saw that his degradation had been
deserved, and Cato retired in triumph. Titus, vexed at what had
befallen his brother, now joined the party of Cato's enemies, objected
to all purchases, lettings, and sales by the Senate of public property
which had been made by Cato, and carried his point so far as to have
them all declared void. Thus he, I cannot say justly, became the
violent opponent of a legally constituted official and an excellent
citizen, for the sake of a man who, though his brother, was a
worthless character and had only met with his deserts. Nevertheless,
on one occasion, when the Roman people were witnessing some spectacle
in the theatre, the Senate, as is customary, sitting in the best place
in great state, they were filled with compassion on seeing Lucius
Flamininus sitting on the back benches in a mean dress, and the people
became so excited that they could not restrain their cries to him to
resume his former seat, until at length he did so, and was welcomed by
the other consulars.

XX. The ambitious character of Titus gained him much glory, while he
was in the prime of life, in the wars of which we have made mention:
for after his consulship he again served in the army as military
tribune; but when he retired from public life, being an elderly man,
he often incurred the blame of his countrymen from his desire to
distinguish himself. For instance, his conduct in regard to Hannibal
made him much disliked at Rome. Hannibal after his escape from
Carthage, joined king Antiochus, but when Antiochus, after his defeat
in Phrygia, was glad to accept terms of peace from the Romans, he
again became an exile, and after many wanderings, at length settled at
the court of Prusias, king of Bithynia. Every one at Rome knew that he
was there, but no one wished to meddle with him because of his age and
weakness, as he appeared to be deserted by fortune. However, Titus was
sent to Prusias on an embassy about certain other matters, and seeing
Hannibal there took offence at his being alive, and would not accede
to the prayers and entreaties of Prusias on behalf of his suppliant.
There was, it seems, a certain oracle which ends with this verse:--

"Libyssa's earth shall cover Hannibal."

Now Hannibal himself took this to mean Libya, and that he should be
buried at Carthage; but in Bithynia there is a shingly tract by the
seashore near which is a large village named Libyssa, in which
Hannibal was living. As he mistrusted the weakness of Prusias and
feared the Romans, he had previously to this arranged seven ways of
escape leading from his own room into different subterranean passages,
all of which led into the open air by concealed apertures. When then
he heard that Titus insisted upon his death he endeavoured to escape
by one of those passages, but finding every outlet watched by the
soldiers of Prusias he determined to die by his own hand. Some say
that he destroyed himself by winding his cloak round his neck, and
ordered a slave to place his knee in the small of his back and pull
the cloak violently until he choked; while some tell us that he
imitated Themistokles and Midas, by drinking bull's blood. Livy[36]
says that he prepared some poison which he kept by him ready for such
an emergency, and that as he was about to drink it he said:--"Let us
set the Roman people free from their terrible anxiety, since they
think it long to wait for the death of the old man whom they hate.
However, Titus will not gain a glorious victory, or one worthy of his
ancestors, who sent to bid Pyrrhus beware of poison, although he was
their enemy and actually at war with them."

XXI. Thus is Hannibal said to have perished. When the news was
brought to the Senate many thought that Titus had acted officiously
and cruelly in putting Hannibal to death, when he was living unharmed
and helpless, merely in order to obtain the credit of having killed
him. When they reflected upon the mildness and magnanimity of Scipio
Africanus they wondered yet more, for Scipio, after vanquishing the
terrible and unconquered Hannibal in Libya, did not drive him into
exile, or insist upon his countrymen delivering him up. He actually
met him on friendly terms before the battle, and when he made a treaty
with him after his victory he did not bear himself unseemly or insult
his rival's misfortune. It is related that they met again in Ephesus,
and that as they walked together Hannibal took the place of honour,
while Africanus walked contentedly beside him. Their conversation
turned upon great generals, and when Hannibal stated his opinion that
the best of generals was Alexander, next to him Pyrrhus, and next
himself, Scipio, with a quiet smile, asked him: "What would you have
said, if I had not conquered you?" "In that case, Scipio," answered
Hannibal, "I should not have reckoned myself third but first of
generals." The people remembering this cried shame upon Titus, for
having laid hands upon a man whom another had slain.[37] Some few,
however, praised the deed, thinking that Hannibal, as long as he
lived, was a fire which might easily be fanned into a destructive
conflagration. They pointed out that even when he was in the prime of
life it was not his bodily strength or personal prowess that made him
so terrible to the Romans, but his intellect and skill, together with
his inveterate hatred of Rome, none of which had been diminished by
age, but that his natural gifts remained the same, while also fortune
was wont to change, and so those who had any permanent cause of enmity
with another nation were ever encouraged by hopes of success to make
new attacks. Indeed subsequent events seemed to prove Titus right, as
Aristonikus, the son of the harp-player, in his admiration for
Eumenes, filled the whole of Asia with revolt and revolution, while
Mithridates, after his tremendous losses at the hands of Sulla and
Fimbria, again gathered together such great forces both by land and
sea to oppose Lucullus. Yet Hannibal did not fall so low as Caius
Marius. The former was to the last the friend of a king, and spent his
time in sailing in ships, riding on horseback, and in the study of how
to keep a military force efficient; whereas the Romans, who had
laughed Marius to scorn as he wandered a beggar in Africa, soon licked
the dust before him while he flogged and slaughtered them in Rome.
Thus no one of our present circumstances can be said to be either
important or trifling, great or small, in comparison with what is to
come, but we only cease to change when we cease to exist.

For this reason some say that Titus did not effect this of his own
free will, but that he was sent with Lucius Scipio as a colleague on
an embassy whose sole object was the death of Hannibal. Now, as after
these events we know of no other acts of Titus either as a warrior or
statesman, and as he died a peaceful death, it is time to begin our
comparison.

XI. Besides writing to Pyrrhus in this strain the kings themselves
contrived to find work for Demetrius, who was still engaged in
preparations for his campaign. Ptolemy sailed to Greece with a large
force and induced many of the Greek cities to revolt from Demetrius,
while Lysimachus, starting from Thrace, invaded and plundered Upper
Macedonia. At the same time Pyrrhus marched upon the city of Berœa,
truly conjecturing that Demetrius, in his haste to repel the invasion
of Upper Macedonia, would leave the lower part of the country
unprotected. That night he dreamed that he was called by Alexander the
Great, and that he at once went to him, and found him reclining on a
couch. The hero received him kindly, and promised him that he would
aid him. When Pyrrhus mustered courage to ask, "How, O king, being
yourself ill, can you assist me?" Alexander answered, "With my name,"
and mounting a Nisæan horse appeared to lead the way. This dream gave
Pyrrhus great confidence: he quickly marched over the intervening
country and took Berœa, where he fixed his headquarters, and sent out
detachments to reduce other places. Demetrius, when he heard this
news, and heard also the tumult of grief and indignation which it
excited in his camp, feared to march any closer to Lysimachus, lest if
his army came near to a king who was a Macedonian, and so
distinguished a man, the troops might transfer their allegiance to
him. He therefore resolved to retrace his steps, and attack Pyrrhus,
as being a foreigner, and an enemy of the Macedonians. However, when
he pitched his camp near Berœa, many came out from that city loudly
praising Pyrrhus, as an invincible warrior and a great man, who had
treated the vanquished with kindness and magnanimity. Some of these
were emissaries of Pyrrhus himself, disguised as Macedonians, who said
that now was the time for them to relieve themselves from the harsh
tyranny of Demetrius by adopting Pyrrhus, a popular man and a true
friend of the soldier, as their king. The greater part of Demetrius's
troops was much excited by this means, and when the two armies met
face to face, all eyes were turned in search of the hero. For a time
they could not find him, for he had taken off his helmet; but when he
had put it on again, and enabled them to recognise him by the lofty
crest, and the goat's horns at the sides, the Macedonian soldiers
quitted their ranks, and came running up to ask him, as their chief,
for the pass-word. Others, seeing that his attendants wore garlands of
oak-leaves, crowned themselves in like manner. Some already ventured
to tell Demetrius that his best course would be to give up all as
lost: and he, observing, that this advice seemed to be borne out by
the temper of his army, withdrew in terror, disguised in a mean dress,
and a broad-brimmed Macedonian hat. Pyrrhus, advancing without
striking a blow, obtained possession of his enemy's camp, and was
saluted king of the Macedonians.

XII. Lysimachus soon appeared upon the scene, pointed out that the
fall of Demetrius was as much due to his own exertions as to those of
Pyrrhus, and demanded a partition of Macedonia. To this Pyrrhus, not
yet certain of the loyalty of his new subjects, was obliged to
consent. This measure was beneficial for the moment, as it prevented
their going to war; but soon it became apparent that the partition was
a source of endless quarrels and recriminations. For when men are
ambitious to such a degree that no seas, mountains, or wildernesses,
nay not even the boundaries of Europe and Asia, will serve as barriers
to their frantic desire for more territory, it is not to be expected
that they will remain quiet when their frontiers touch one another,
but they always are at war, from the natural jealousy of their
disposition. The names of peace and war they use as mere symbols, as
it suits their convenience, and they are really better men when they
are openly at war than when they give the name of peace and friendship
to a cessation of active wickedness. The truth of this was proved by
Pyrrhus, who in order to prevent Demetrius from recovering from the
great disaster which he had sustained, espoused the cause of Greece,
and marched to Athens. Here he went up to the Acropolis and sacrificed
to the goddess Athena. On descending he thanked the Athenians for
their confidence in him, but advised them if they consulted their own
interest never to admit any king within their walls.[40] After this he
made peace with Demetrius, but shortly after he was gone to Asia,
Pyrrhus, at the instigation of Lysimachus, induced the Thessalians to
revolt and join him, and began to besiege the fortresses on the Greek
border, both because he found the Macedonians easier to manage when
they were at war than when they were idle, and also because he himself
was of a nature which could not endure inaction. Finally however
Demetrius was irretrievably ruined in Syria, and now Lysimachus,
having nothing further to fear from him, at once attacked Pyrrhus. He
fell upon him suddenly near Edessa, defeated him, and reduced the
troops under him to great distress for provisions. Next he began to
corrupt the leading Macedonians, reproaching them with having rejected
a Macedonian who had been the friend and companion of Alexander, and
chosen in his stead as their master a foreigner, and one, too, of a
race that had always been subject to the Macedonians. As many listened
to these treacherous insinuations, Pyrrhus became alarmed, and
withdrew with his Epirotes and the allied troops, thus losing
Macedonia in the same way that he had gained it. So that kings have
but little reason for reproaching the common people for changing sides
in an emergency, for in doing so they do but imitate the kings
themselves, their teachers in the art of treachery and faithlessness,
who think that those men gain the greatest advantages who take least
account of justice and honour.

XIII. Pyrrhus, now that he had lost Macedonia, might have spent his
days peacefully ruling his own subjects in Epirus; but he could not
endure repose, thinking that not to trouble others and be troubled by
them was a life of unbearable ennui, and, like Achilles in the Iliad,

XVI. With these Pyrrhus marched to Tarentum; Kineas, as soon as he
heard of his arrival, bringing out the Tarentine army to meet him.
When he reached the city he did nothing to displease the Tarentines
until his fleet returned to the coast and he had assembled the greater
part of his army. But then, as he saw that the populace, unless ruled
by a strong hand, could neither help him nor help themselves, but
intended to stay idling about their baths and entertainments at home,
while he fought their battles in the field, he closed the gymnasia
and public walks, in which the people were wont to waste their time in
empty talk about the war. He forbade all drinking, feasting, and
unseasonable revels, and forced the people to take up arms, proving
himself inexorable to every one who was on the muster-roll of
able-bodied citizens. This conduct made him much disliked, and many of
the Tarentines left the city in disgust; for they were so unused to
discipline, that they considered that not to be able to pass their
lives as they chose was no better than slavery.

When news came that Lævinus, the Roman consul, was marching to attack
him with a large force, and was plundering the country of Lucania as
he advanced, while Pyrrhus's allies had not yet arrived, he thought it
a shameful thing to allow the enemy to proceed any farther, and
marched out with his army. He sent before him a herald to the Roman
general, informing him that he was willing to act as arbitrator in the
dispute between the Romans and the Greek cities of Italy, if they
chose to terminate it peacefully. On receiving for an answer that the
Romans neither wished for Pyrrhus as an arbitrator, nor feared him as
an enemy, he marched forward, and encamped in the plain, between the
city of Pandosia and Heraklea. Learning that the Romans were close by,
and were encamping on the farther side of the river Siris[41] he rode
up to the river to view them; and when he observed their even ranks,
their orderly movements, and their well-arranged camp, he was
surprised, and said to the nearest of his friends: "These barbarians,
Megakles, have nothing barbarous in their military discipline; but we
shall soon learn what they can do." He began indeed already to feel
some uncertainty as to the issue of the campaign, and determined to
wait until his allies came up, and till then to observe the movements
of the Romans, and prevent their crossing the river. They however,
perceiving his object, at once crossed the river, the infantry at a
ford, the cavalry at many points at once, so that the Greeks feared
they might be surrounded, and drew back. Pyrrhus, perceiving this,
ordered his officers instantly to form the troops in order of battle
and wait under arms while he himself charged with the cavalry, three
thousand strong, hoping to catch the Romans in the act of crossing the
river and consequently in disorder. When he saw many shields of the
Roman infantry appearing over the river bank, and their horsemen all
ranged in order, he closed up his own ranks and charged them first
himself, a conspicuous figure in his beautiful glittering armour, and
proving by his exploits that he deserved his high reputation;
especially as, although he fought personally, and engaged in combat
with the enemy, yet he continually watched the whole battle, and
handled his troops with as much facility as though he were not in the
thick of the fight, appearing always wherever his presence was
required, and reinforcing those who seemed likely to give way. In this
battle Leonnatus the Macedonian observing one of the Italians watching
Pyrrhus and constantly following him about the field, said to him, "My
king, do you see that barbarian on the black horse with white feet? He
seems to be meditating some desperate deed. He is a man of spirit and
courage, and he never takes his eyes off you, and takes no notice of
any one else. Beware of that man." Pyrrhus answered, "Leonnatus, no
man can avoid his fate; but neither that Italian nor any one else who
attacks me will do so with impunity." While they were yet talking the
Italian levelled his lance, and urged his horse in full career against
Pyrrhus. He struck the king's horse with his spear, and at the same
instant his own horse was struck a sidelong blow by Leonnatus. Both
horses fell; Pyrrhus was saved by his friends, and the Italian
perished fighting. He was of the nation of the Frentani, Hoplacus by
name, and was the captain of a troop of horse.

XVII. This incident taught Pyrrhus to be more cautious. He observed
that his cavalry were inclined to give way, and therefore sent for his
phalanx, and arrayed it against the enemy. Then he gave his cloak and
armour to one of his companions, Megakles, and after partially
disguising himself in those of his friend, led his main body to attack
the Roman army. The Romans stoutly resisted him, and an obstinate
battle took place, for it is said that the combatants alternately
yielded and again pressed forward no less than seven distinct times.
The king's exchange of armour too, though it saved his life, yet very
nearly lost him the victory: for many attacked Megakles, and the man
who first struck him down, who was named Decius, snatched up his cloak
and helmet, and rode with them to Lævinus, displaying them and
shouting aloud that he had slain Pyrrhus. The Romans, when they saw
these spoils carried in triumph along their ranks, raised a joyful
cry, while the Greeks were correspondingly disheartened until Pyrrhus,
learning what had taken place, rode along the line with his head bare,
stretching out his hands to his soldiers and telling them that he was
safe. At length he was victorious, chiefly by means of a sudden charge
of his Thessalian horse on the Romans after they had been thrown into
disorder by the advance of the elephants. The Roman horses were
terrified at these animals, and long before they came near, ran away
with their riders in panic. The slaughter was very great: Dionysius
says that of the Romans there fell but little short of fifteen
thousand, but Hieronymus reduces this to seven thousand, while on
Pyrrhus's side there fell, according to Dionysius, thirteen thousand,
but according to Hieronymus less than four thousand. These however,
were the very flower of Pyrrhus's army; for he lost all his most
trusty officers, and his most intimate personal friends. Still, he
captured the Roman camp, which was abandoned by the enemy, induced
several of their allied cities to join him, plundered a vast extent of
country, and advanced within three hundred stades (less than forty
English miles) of Rome itself. After the battle many of the Lucanians
and Samnites came up; these allies he reproached for their dilatory
movements, but was evidently well pleased at having conquered the
great Roman army with no other forces but his own Epirotes and the
Tarentines.

XVIII. The Romans did not remove Lævinus from his office of consul,
although Caius Fabricius is reported to have said that it was not the
Epirotes who had conquered the Romans, but Pyrrhus who had conquered
Lævinus; meaning that he thought that the defeat was owing not to the
greater force but the superior generalship of the enemy. They
astonished Pyrrhus by quickly filling up their ranks with fresh
levies, and talking about the war in a spirit of fearless confidence.
He decided to try whether they were disposed to make terms with him,
as he perceived that to capture Rome and utterly subdue the Roman
people would be a work of no small difficulty, and that it would be
vain to attempt it with the force at his disposal, while after his
victory he could make peace on terms which would reflect great lustre
on himself. Kineas was sent as ambassador to conduct this negotiation.
He conversed with the leading men of Rome, and offered their wives and
children presents from the king. No one, however, would accept them,
but they all, men and women alike, replied that, if peace were
publicly concluded with the king, they would then have no objection to
regard him as a friend. And when Kineas spoke before the Senate in a
winning and persuasive manner he could not make any impression upon
his audience, although he announced to them that Pyrrhus would restore
the prisoners he had taken without any ransom, and would assist them
in subduing all Italy, while all that he asked in return was that he
should be regarded as a friend, and that the people of Tarentum should
not be molested. The common people, however, were evidently eager for
peace, in consequence of their having been defeated in one great
battle, and expecting that they would have to fight another against a
larger force, because the Italian states would join Pyrrhus. At this
crisis Appius Claudius, an illustrious man, but who had long since
been prevented by old age and blindness from taking any active part in
politics, when he heard of the proposals of Pyrrhus, and that the
question of peace or war was about to be voted upon by the Senate,
could no longer endure to remain at home, but caused his slaves to
carry him through the Forum to the Senate House in a litter. When he
reached the doors of the Senate House his sons and sons-in-law
supported him and guided him into the house, while all the assembly
observed a respectful silence.

XIX. Speaking from where he stood, he addressed them as follows:--"My
countrymen, I used to grieve at the loss of my sight, but now I am
sorry not to be deaf also, when I hear the disgraceful propositions
with which you are tarnishing the glory of Rome. What has become of
that boast which we were so fond of making before all mankind, that if
Alexander the Great had invaded Italy, and had met us when we were
young, and our fathers when they were in the prime of life, he would
not have been reputed invincible, but would either have fled or
perhaps even have fallen, and added to the glory of Rome? You now
prove that this was mere empty vapouring, by your terror of these
Chaonians and Molossians, nations who have always been a prey and a
spoil to the Macedonians, and by your fear of this Pyrrhus, who used
formerly to dance attendance on one of Alexander's bodyguards,[42] and
who has now wandered hither not so much in order to assist the Greeks
in Italy as to escape from his enemies at home, and promises to be our
friend and protector forsooth, when the army he commands did not
suffice to keep for him the least portion of that Macedonia which he
once acquired. Do not imagine that you will get rid of this man by
making a treaty with him. Rather you will encourage other Greek
princes to invade you, for they will despise you and think you an easy
prey to all men, if you let Pyrrhus go home again without paying the
penalty of his outrages upon you, nay, with the power to boast that he
has made Rome a laughing-stock for Tarentines and Samnites."

By these words Appius roused a warlike spirit in the Romans, and they
dismissed Kineas with the answer that if Pyrrhus would leave Italy
they would, if he wished, discuss the question of an alliance with
him, but that while he remained in arms in their country the Romans
would fight him to the death, however many Lævinuses he might defeat.
It is related that Kineas, during his mission to Rome, took great
interest in observing the national life of the Romans, and fully
appreciated the excellence of their political constitution, which he
learned by conversing with many of the leading men of the state. On
his return he told Pyrrhus that the Senate seemed to him like an
assembly of kings, and that as to the populace, he feared that the
Greeks might find in them a new Lernæan hydra; for twice as many
troops had been enrolled in the consul's army as he had before, and
yet there remained many more Romans capable of bearing arms.

XX. After this Caius Fabricius came to arrange terms for the exchange
of prisoners; a man whom Kineas said the Romans especially valued for
his virtue and bravery, but who was excessively poor. Pyrrhus, in
consequence of this, entertained Fabricius privately, and made him an
offer of money, not as a bribe for any act of baseness, but speaking
of it as a pledge of friendship and sincerity. As Fabricius refused
this, Pyrrhus waited till the next day, when, desirous of making an
impression on him, as he had never seen an elephant, he had his
largest elephant placed behind Fabricius during their conference,
concealed by a curtain. At a given signal, the curtain was withdrawn,
and the creature reached out his trunk over the head of Fabricius with
a harsh and terrible cry. Fabricius, however, quietly turned round,
and then said to Pyrrhus with a smile, "You could not move me by your
gold yesterday, nor can you with your beast to-day." At table that day
they conversed upon all subjects, but chiefly about Greece and Greek
philosophy. Kineas repeated the opinion of Epikurus and his school,
about the gods, and the practice of political life, and the objects at
which we should aim, how they considered pleasure to be the highest
good, and held aloof from taking any active part in politics, because
it spoiled and destroyed perfect happiness; and about how they thought
that the gods lived far removed from hopes and fears, and interest in
human affairs, in a placid state of eternal fruition.[43] While he was
speaking in this strain Fabricius burst out: "Hercules!" cried he,
"May Pyrrhus and the Samnites continue to waste their time on these
speculations, as long as they remain at war with us!" Pyrrhus, at
this, was struck by the spirit and noble disposition of Fabricius,
and longed more than ever to make Rome his friend instead of his
enemy. He begged him to arrange terms of peace, and after they were
concluded to come and live with him as the first of his friends and
officers. Fabricius is said to have quietly answered, "That, O King,
will not be to your advantage; for those who now obey you, and look up
to you, if they had any experience of me, would prefer me to you for
their king." Pyrrhus was not angry at this speech, but spoke to all
his friends about the magnanimous conduct of Fabricius, and entrusted
the prisoners to him alone, on the condition that, if the Senate
refused to make peace, they should be allowed to embrace their
friends, and spend the festival of the Saturnalia with them, and then
be sent back to him. And they were sent back after the Saturnalia, for
the Senate decreed that any of them who remained behind should be put
to death.

XXI. After this, when C. Fabricius was consul, a man came into his
camp bringing a letter from King Pyrrhus's physician, in which he
offered to poison the king, if he could be assured of a suitable
reward for his services in thus bringing the war to an end without a
blow. Fabricius, disgusted at the man's treachery, brought his
colleague to share his views, and in haste sent off a letter to
Pyrrhus, bidding him be on his guard. The letter ran as follows:
"Caius Fabricius and Quintus Æmilius, the Roman consuls, greet King
Pyrrhus. You appear to be a bad judge both of your friends and of your
enemies. You will perceive, by reading the enclosed letter which has
been sent to us, that you are fighting against good and virtuous men,
and trusting to wicked and treacherous ones. We do not give you this
information out of any love we bear you, but for fear that we might be
charged with having assassinated you and be thought to have brought
the war to a close by treachery because we could not do so by
manhood."

Pyrrhus on receiving this letter, and discovering the plot against his
life, punished his physician, and, in return for the kindness of
Fabricius and the Romans, delivered up their prisoners without ransom,
and sent Kineas a second time to arrange terms of peace. However, the
Romans refused to receive their prisoners back without ransom, being
unwilling either to receive a favour from their enemy, or to be
rewarded for having abstained from treachery towards him, but set free
an equal number of Tarentines and Samnites, and sent them to him. As
to terms of peace, they refused to entertain the question unless
Pyrrhus first placed his entire armament on board the ships in which
it came, and sailed back to Epirus with it.

XXIV. The barbarians[46] combined to attack him as he retreated. He
fought a battle at sea with the Carthaginian fleet during his passage
to Italy, in which he lost many ships, while the Mamertines, ten
thousand strong, had crossed into Italy before he could reach it, and
although they did not dare to fight a pitched battle, yet harassed him
by attacking him when entangled in some rough ground, and threw his
entire army into confusion. Two elephants and many of his rear-guard
perished. Pyrrhus himself was at the head of the column of march, but
at once rode to the rear and restored the fight, but was in great
danger from the brave and warlike Mamertines. He received a blow upon
his head from a sword, which forced him to retire a little way from
the battle, and greatly elated the enemy. One of them, a powerful man,
splendidly armed, ran forward far beyond the rest, and boastfully
challenged him to come forward and fight, if he were alive. At this
Pyrrhus was so exasperated that he broke forcibly away from the
officers who tried to restrain him, and, with his face covered with
blood, and a savage expression of fury on his countenance, rushed upon
the barbarian, and struck him a blow on the head which showed both the
strength of his arm and the admirable temper of his sword, for it
clave him completely asunder, so that his body fell down in two
pieces. This checked the ardour of the barbarians, who admired and
feared Pyrrhus as a superior being. He was able to march unopposed for
the rest of the way to Tarentum, to which city he brought a force of
twenty thousand infantry and three thousand cavalry. Taking with him
the best troops of the Tarentines he now marched at once to attack the
Romans, who were encamped in the territory of the Samnites.

XXV. The Samnites at this period were entirely ruined and broken in
spirit from the numerous defeats which they had sustained at the hands
of the Romans. Some dissatisfaction also was felt with Pyrrhus for
having neglected them while he was campaigning in Sicily; so that not
many of that nation joined him. Pyrrhus now divided his forces,
sending one portion into Lucania to harass the other consul and
prevent his coming to the assistance of his colleague, while he
himself led the remainder to attack Manius Curius, who was quietly
encamped near the city of Beneventum, awaiting the arrival of the
Lucanian forces. It is also said that his soothsayers told him, that
the omens were not in favour of his moving from where he was. Pyrrhus,
eager to attack him before the other consul's army joined him, made a
hurried night march with his best troops and elephants, hoping to
surprise the Roman camp. But during the march, which was long, and
through a densely-wooded country, their torches went out, the soldiers
lost their way in the darkness, and got into confusion. Day at length
appeared, and showed to the Romans Pyrrhus with his army, advancing
from the heights near their camp. The sight caused some disorder and
excitement, but as the omens were now favourable, and the emergency
required prompt action, Manius Curius led out his men, attacked the
first troops of Pyrrhus's army whom he met, routed them, and dismayed
the whole force, so that many were slain and several elephants
captured. This success emboldened Manius to begin a general action on
the more level ground, where he defeated the enemy with one wing of
his army, but on the other his troops were overpowered by the charge
of the elephants and driven back to their camp. Curius now called to
his aid the soldiers left to guard the camp, who were standing under
arms along the ramparts, and were quite fresh and unwearied. They
assailed the elephants with a shower of darts, which caused them to
turn and fly, trampling down their own men in their flight. The Romans
thus gained the victory, and at the same time the reputation of being
the first military nation in the world. For their display of valour on
this occasion led to their being thought invincible, and to their at
once gaining possession of the whole of Italy, and shortly afterwards
of Sicily also.

XXVI. Thus did Pyrrhus fail in his Italian and Sicilian expeditions,
after spending six years of constant fighting in those countries,
during which he lost a great part of his force, but always, even in
his defeats, preserved his reputation for invincible bravery, being
thought, in warlike skill and personal strength and daring, to be by
far the first prince of his age. Yet he always threw away the
advantages which he gained, in following some chimerical scheme of
further conquest, being unable to take proper measures for the present
because of his eagerness for the future. On this account Antigonus
likened him to a player who made many good throws with the dice, but
who did not know how to use them. He carried back to Epirus with him
eight thousand infantry and five hundred cavalry, and, having no
money, began to look out for a war, by which he might support his
army. Some of the Gauls now joined him, and he at once invaded
Macedonia, where Antigonus, the son of Demetrius, was now king, with
the intention of plundering the country. Soon, however, as he took
several cities, and two thousand Macedonian soldiers deserted their
colours and joined him, he began to entertain more ambitious designs,
marched against Antigonus himself, and was able to surprise his army,
near the issue of a defile, by a sudden attack in the rear.
Notwithstanding the general confusion, however, a strong body of
Gauls, who formed the rear-guard, withstood him manfully, but, after a
vigorous resistance, were nearly all cut to pieces, while the
elephants, whose retreat was cut off, were surrendered by their
leaders. After gaining such an advantage as this, Pyrrhus, trusting to
his good fortune, and without calculating the numbers opposed to him,
advanced to attack the Macedonian phalanx, which was full of disorder
and consternation at the defeat of the rear-guard. No attempt was made
by them to strike a blow. Pyrrhus stretched out his hand and called
the Macedonian officers by their names, and they at once went over to
him, and were followed by all their men. Antigonus escaped to the
sea-coast, where he still retained some cities in their obedience.

Kleonymus, now an elderly man, had married a beautiful wife of the
royal blood, Chilonis, the daughter of Leotychides. She fell madly in
love with Akrotatus, the son of Areus, a youth in the flower of his
age, and the dishonour of Kleonymus became notorious all over Sparta.
This private wrong, added to his previous exclusion from the throne,
so enraged him, that he invited Pyrrhus to attack Sparta, which he did
with an army of twenty-five thousand foot, two thousand horse, and
twenty-four elephants, so that it was obvious that he did not mean to
gain Sparta for Kleonymus, but to conquer the whole of Peloponnesus
for himself, although he answered some Spartan envoys who waited on
him at Megalopolis in specious language, stating that he had come with
the intention of restoring to freedom the cities which were held in
subjection by Antigonus, and actually going so far as to tell them
that, if possible, he intended to send his younger sons to Sparta to
be trained in the Laconian discipline, by which they would be able to
surpass all the other kings of their age. He put off the envoys with
these stories, and made them accompany his army, but on reaching the
Lacedæmonian territory he at once began to plunder and lay it waste.
When the envoys remonstrated with him for having invaded their country
without a declaration of war, he answered--"We know well that neither
do you Spartans tell any one beforehand what you mean to do." One of
the envoys, by name Mandrokleides, said in his broad Laconian speech,
"If you are a god, we shall not be harmed by you, for we have done no
wrong; but if you are a man, you may meet with a stronger man than
yourself."

XXVII. After this he marched upon Lacedæmon itself. Kleonymus urged
him to make an assault immediately on the evening of his arrival, but
Pyrrhus is said to have refused to do so, for fear that his soldiers
might sack and destroy the city if they took it at night, while they
might easily take it in the daytime. Indeed the Spartans were taken by
surprise, and very few were in the city, the king Areus himself being
absent in Crete on an expedition to assist the people of Gortyna. And
it was this weakness and absence of defenders that really proved the
salvation of the city, for Pyrrhus, not expecting any resistance,
pitched his camp outside the walls, while the friends and helots of
Kleonymus made ready his house and decorated it, expecting that
Pyrrhus would sup there with him. At nightfall the Lacedæmonians at
first proposed to send away the women to Crete, but they refused to
leave the city. Archidamia[47] even went to the senate-house with a
drawn sword in her hands, and on behalf of the women of Sparta
reproached the men for insulting them by supposing that they would
survive the capture of their city. After this, they determined to dig
a ditch along the side of the city nearest to Pyrrhus's camp, and to
barricade the ends of it with waggons buried up to the axles in the
ground, to resist the charge of the elephants. When this work was
begun the women and girls appeared with their tunics girt up for
work,[48] and laboured at digging the ditch together with the older
men. They bade those who were to fight on the morrow take rest, and
they themselves alone dug one-third of the entire ditch. The width of
the ditch was six cubits, its depth four cubits, and its length eight
hundred feet, as we are told by Phylarchus, though Hieronymus makes
its dimensions more moderate. At daybreak, when the enemy began to
bestir themselves, the women armed the younger men, and handed over
the ditch to them, bidding them defend it, as it would be pleasant for
them to conquer in sight of their country, and glorious to die in the
arms of their mothers and wives after having fought worthily of
Sparta. Chilonis herself had retired to her own house, and had a
halter ready about her neck, in order that if the city were taken she
might not fall into the hands of Kleonymus.

XXVIII. Pyrrhus himself led a direct attack of his infantry against
the Spartans, who were drawn up in deep order, and endeavoured to
force his way through them, and to pass the ditch, which was
difficult, because the newly dug earth afforded no secure footing to
his soldiers. Meanwhile his son Ptolemy led a chosen body of two
thousand Gauls and Chaonians round the end of the ditch, and
endeavoured to break through the barricade of waggons. These stood so
thick and so close together that they made it hard, not only for the
assailants to cross them, but even for the Lacedæmonians to reach the
point where they were menaced. However, as the Gauls began to pull the
wheels out of the earth and to drag the waggons down towards the
river, the young Akrotatus perceiving the danger, sallied out from the
city at another point with three hundred men, and got round behind
Ptolemy's force, from whom he was concealed by some hilly ground. Then
he vigorously assailed the Gauls in the rear, and forced them to face
about and defend themselves, which caused great confusion, as they
were driven among the waggons and into the ditch by the Spartans until
at last they were forced to retreat. This glorious exploit of
Akrotatus was witnessed from the city walls by the old men and all the
women. As he returned through the city to his appointed post, covered
with blood and rejoicing in his victory, the Spartan women thought
that he had grown taller and more handsome than before, and they
envied Chilonis her lover. Some of the old men even followed him,
shouting, "Go home, Akrotatus, and enjoy yourself with Chilonis: only
beget brave sons for Sparta." Where Pyrrhus fought a terrible battle
took place, and many valiant deeds were wrought. A Spartan named
Phyllius, after greatly distinguishing himself and slaying many of the
assailants, when he felt himself mortally wounded, made way for his
rear rank-man to take his place, and died inside the line of shields,
in order that his corpse might not fall into the hands of the enemy.

LIFE OF CAIUS MARIUS.

I. I cannot mention any third name[51] of Caius Marius, any more than
of Quintus Sertorius, who held Spain, or of Lucius Mummius, who took
Corinth; for the name Achaicus was given to Mummius in commemoration
of this event, just as the name Africanus was given to Scipio, and
Macedonicus to Metellus. This seems to Poseidonius to be the strongest
refutation of the opinion of those who suppose that the third name was
the proper individual name among the Romans, such as Camillus, and
Marcellus, and Cato; for he argues, if this were so, those who had
only the two names would be really without a name. But Poseidonius
does not perceive that by this argument he on his side makes the women
to be without names: for no woman ever has the first of the three
names, which first, however, Poseidonius supposes to be the name which
marked individuals among the Romans; and of the other two names, he
supposes the one to be common and to belong to all of one kin, such as
the Pompeii and the Manlii and the Cornelii, just as the Greeks might
speak of the Herakleidæ and the Pelopidæ; but the other name he
supposes to be an appellation given as a distinctive name, either with
reference to a man's disposition or his actions, or some character and
peculiarity of his person, such as Macrinus and Torquatus and Sulla,
which may be compared with the Greek Mnemon or Grypus or Kallinikus.
However, in such matters as these the diversity in usage allows a
variety of conjectures.

II. With respect to the personal appearance of Marius, I saw a stone
statue[52] of him at Ravenna in Gaul, which was perfectly in
accordance with what is said of the roughness and harshness of his
character. He was naturally of a courageous and warlike turn, and had
more of the discipline of the camp than of the state, and accordingly
his temper was ungovernable when he was in the possession of power. It
is stated that he never studied Greek literature, and never availed
himself of the Greek language for any serious purpose, for he said it
was ridiculous to study a literature the teachers of which were the
slaves of others; and after his second triumph, when he exhibited
Greek plays[53] on the occasion of the dedication of a certain temple,
though he came to the theatre, he only sat down for a moment and then
went away. Xenokrates the philosopher was considered to be rather of a
morose temper, and Plato was in the habit of frequently saying to him,
"My good Xenokrates, sacrifice to the Graces;" in like manner, if
Marius could have been persuaded to sacrifice to the Grecian Muses and
Graces, he would never have brought a most illustrious military and
civil career to a most unseemly conclusion; through passion and
unreasonable love of power and insatiable desire of
self-aggrandizement driven to terminate his course in an old age of
cruelty and ferocity. Let this, however, be judged of by the facts as
they will presently appear.

III. Marius was the son of obscure parents, who gained their living by
the labour of their hands, and were poor. His father's name was
Marius; his mother's name was Fulcinia. It was late before he saw Rome
and became acquainted with the habits of the city, up to which time he
lived at Cirrhæato,[54] a village in the territory of Arpinum, where
his mode of life was rude, when contrasted with the polite and
artificial fashions of a city, but temperate and in accordance with
the old Roman discipline. He first served against the Celtiberians
when Scipio Africanus was besieging Numantia, and he attracted the
notice of his commander by his superiority in courage over all the
other young soldiers, and by the readiness with which he adapted
himself to the change in living which Scipio introduced among the
troops, who had been corrupted by luxurious habits and extravagance.
He is said also to have killed one of the enemy in single combat in
the presence of the general. Accordingly Marius received from Scipio
various honourable distinctions; and on one occasion, after supper,
when the conversation was about generals, and one of the company,
either because he really felt a difficulty or merely wished to flatter
Scipio, asked him where the Roman people would find such another
leader and protector when he was gone, Scipio with his hand gently
touched the shoulder of Marius, who was reclining next to him, and
said, "Perhaps here." So full of promise was the youth of Marius, and
so discerning was the judgment of Scipio.

IV. Now it is said that Marius, mainly encouraged by these words,
which he viewed as a divine intimation, entered on a political career,
and obtained the tribuneship, in which he was assisted by Cæcilius
Metellus,[55] of whose house the family of Marius had long been an
adherent. During his tribuneship Marius proposed a law on the mode of
voting, which apparently tended to deprive the nobles of their power
in the Judicia: the measure was opposed by Cotta, the consul, who
persuaded the Senate to resist the proposed law, and to summon Marius
to account for his conduct. The decree proposed by Cotta was drawn up,
and Marius appeared before the Senate; but so far from being
disconcerted, as a young man might naturally be, who without any
advantages had just stepped into public life, he already assumed the
tone which his subsequent exploits authorized, and threatened to carry
off Cotta to prison if he did not rescind the decree. Upon Cotta
turning to Metellus and asking his opinion, Metellus arose and
supported the consul; but Marius, sending for the officer who was
outside of the house, ordered him to carry off Metellus himself to
prison. Metellus appealed to the rest of the tribunes without effect,
and the Senate yielded and abandoned the decree. Marius now
triumphantly came before the popular assembly and got his law
ratified, having proved himself to be a man unassailable by fear, not
to be diverted from his purpose by any motive of personal respect, and
a formidable opponent to the Senate by his measures which were adapted
to win the public favour. But he soon gave people reason to change
their opinion; for he most resolutely opposed a measure for the
distribution of corn among the citizens, and succeeding in his
opposition, he established himself in equal credit with both parties,
as a man who would do nothing to please either, if it were contrary to
the public interest.

V. After the tribuneship he was a candidate for the greater ædileship.
Now there are two classes of ædileships: one, which derives its name
(curule[56]) from the seats with curved feet on which the ædiles sit
when they discharge their functions; the other, the inferior, is
called the plebeian ædileship. When they have chosen the higher
ædiles, they then take the vote again for the election of the others.
Now as Marius was manifestly losing in the votes for the curule
ædileship, he forthwith changed about and became a candidate for the
other ædileship. But this was viewed as an audacious and arrogant
attempt, and he failed in his election; but though he thus met with
two repulses in one day, which never happened to any man before, he
did not abate one tittle of his pretensions, for no long time after he
was a candidate for a prætorship,[57] in which he narrowly missed a
failure, being the last of all who were declared to be elected, and he
was prosecuted for bribery.[58] What gave rise to most suspicion was
the fact that a slave of Cassius Sabaco[59] was seen within the septa
mingled with the voters; for Sabaco was one of the most intimate
friends of Marius. Accordingly Sabaco was cited before the judices;
he explained the circumstance by saying that the heat had made him
very thirsty, and he called for a cup of cold water, which his slave
brought to him within the septa, and left it as soon as he had drunk
the water. Sabaco was ejected from the Senate by the next censors, and
people were of opinion that he deserved it, either because he had
given false testimony or for his intemperance. Caius Herennius also
was summoned as a witness against Marius, but he declared that it was
contrary to established usage to give testimony against a client[60]
and that patrons (for this is the name that the Romans give to
protectors) were legally excused from this duty, and that the parents
of Marius, and Marius himself, originally were clients of his house.
Though the judices accepted the excuse as valid, Marius himself
contradicted Herennius, and maintained that for the moment when he was
declared to be elected to a magistracy, he became divested of the
relation of client; which was not exactly true, for it is not every
magistracy which releases a man who has obtained it, and his family,
from the necessity of having a patron, but only those magistracies to
which the law assigns the curule seat. However, on the first days of
the trial it went hard with Marius, and the judices were strongly
against him; yet on the last day, contrary to all expectation, he was
acquitted, the votes being equal.

VI. During his prætorship Marius got only a moderate degree of credit.
But on the expiration of his office he obtained by lot the further
province of Iberia (Spain), and it is said that during his command he
cleared all the robber[61] establishments out of his government, which
was still an uncivilised country in its habits and in a savage state,
as the Iberians had not yet ceased to consider robbery as no
dishonourable occupation. Though Marius had now embarked in a public
career, he had neither wealth nor eloquence, by means of which those
who then held the chief power were used to manage the people. But the
resoluteness of his character, and his enduring perseverance in toil,
and his plain manner of living, got him the popular favour, and he
increased in estimation and influence, so as to form a matrimonial
alliance with the illustrious house of the Cæsars,[62] with Julia,
whose nephew Cæsar afterwards became the greatest of the Romans and in
some degree imitated his relation Marius, as I have told in the Life
of Cæsar. There is evidence both of the temperance of Marius and also
of his endurance, which was proved by his behaviour about a surgical
operation. Both his legs, it is said, had become varicose,[63] and as
he disliked this deformity, he resolved to put himself in the
surgeon's hands. Accordingly he presented to the surgeon one of his
legs without allowing himself to be bound; and without making a single
movement or uttering a single groan, with steady countenance and in
silence he endured excessive pain during the operation. But when the
surgeon was going to take the other leg, Marius refused to present it,
saying that he perceived the cure was not worth the pain.

VII. When Cæcilius Metellus[64] was appointed consul with the command
of the war against Jugurtha, he took Marius with him to Libya in the
capacity of legatus.[65] Here Marius signalised himself by great
exploits and brilliant success in battle, but he did not, like the
rest, seek to increase the glory of Metellus and to direct all his
efforts for the advantage of his general, but disdaining to be called
a legatus of Metellus, and considering that fortune had offered him a
most favourable opportunity and a wide theatre for action, he
displayed his courage on every occasion. Though the war was
accompanied with many hardships, he shrunk not from danger however
great, and he thought nothing too mean to be neglected, but in prudent
measures and careful foresight he surpassed all the officers of his
own rank, and he vied with the soldiers in hard living and endurance,
and thus gained their affections. For certainly there is nothing which
reconciles a man so readily to toil as to see another voluntarily
sharing it with him, for thus the compulsion seems to be taken away;
and the most agreeable sight to a Roman soldier is to see his general
in his presence eating common bread or sleeping on a coarse mat, or
taking a hand in any trench-work and fortification. Soldiers do not so
much admire a general who shares with them the honour and the spoil,
as one who participates in their toils and dangers; and they love a
general who will take a part in their labours more than one who
indulges their licence. By such conduct as this, and by gaining the
affection of the soldiers, Marius soon filled Libya and Rome with his
fame and his glory, for the soldiers wrote to their friends at home
and told them there would be no end to the war with the barbarian, no
deliverance from it, if they did not elect Marius consul.

VIII. These proceedings evidently caused great annoyance to Metellus;
but the affair of Turpillius[66] vexed him most of all. The family of
Turpillius for several generations had been connected with that of
Metellus by friendly relations, and Turpillius was then serving in the
army at the head of a body of engineers. It happened that he was
commissioned to take charge of Vaga, which was a large city. Trusting
for his security to the forbearance with which he treated the
inhabitants, and his kind and friendly intercourse with them, he was
thrown off his guard and fell into the hands of his enemies, who
admitted Jugurtha into the city. Turpillius, however, was not injured,
and the citizens obtained his release and sent him away. He was
accordingly charged with treason, and Marius, who was present at the
trial as an assessor, was violent against him and excited most of the
rest, so that Metellus was unwillingly compelled to pronounce sentence
of death against the man. Shortly after it appeared that the charge
was false, and everybody except Marius sympathised with Metellus, who
was grieved at what had taken place; but Marius exultingly claimed the
merit of the condemnation, and was shameless enough to go about saying
that he had fixed on Metellus a dæmon which would avenge the death of
the man whom it was his duty to protect. This brought Metellus and
Marius to open enmity; and it is reported that on one occasion when
Marius was present, Metellus said in an insulting way, "You, forsooth,
my good fellow, intend to leave us and make the voyage to Rome, to
offer yourself for the consulship; and you won't be content to be the
colleague of this son of mine." Now the son of Metellus[67] was at
that time a very young man. Marius however was still importunate to
obtain leave of absence; and Metellus, after devising various pretexts
for delay, at last allowed him to go, when there were only twelve days
left before the consuls would be declared. Marius accomplished the
long journey from the camp to Utica, on the coast, in two days and one
night, and offered sacrifice before he set sail. It is said that the
priest told him that the deity gave prognostications of success beyond
all measure and all expectation, and accordingly Marius set sail with
high hopes. In four days he crossed the sea with a favourable wind,
and was most joyfully received by the people, and being introduced to
the popular assembly by one of the tribunes, he began by violent abuse
of Metellus, and ended with asking for the consulship and promising
that he would either kill Jugurtha or take him alive.

IX. Being declared consul by a great majority, he immediately set
about levying soldiers in a way contrary to law and usage, by
enrolling a great number of the poorer sort and of slaves, though
former generals had never admitted men of this kind into the army, but
had given arms, as they would anything else that was a badge of
honour, only to those who had the due qualification, inasmuch as every
soldier was thus considered to pledge his property to the State. It
was not this however which made Marius most odious, but his insolent
and arrogant expressions, which gave offence to the nobles, for he
publicly said that he considered his acquisition of the consulship a
trophy gained over the effeminacy of the noble and the rich, and that
what he could proudly show to the people was his own wounds, not the
monuments of the dead or the likenesses[68] of others. And he would
often speak of the generals who had been defeated in Libya, mentioning
by name Bestia[69] and Albinus, men of illustrious descent indeed, but
unskilled in military matters, and for want of experience
unsuccessful; and he would ask his hearers whether they did not think
that the ancestors of Bestia and Albinus would rather have left
descendants like himself, for they also had gained an honourable fame;
not by noble birth, but by their virtues and their illustrious deeds.
This was not said as a mere empty boast, nor simply because he wished
to make himself odious to the nobles; but the people, who were
delighted to hear the Senate abused, and always measured the greatness
of a man's designs by the bigness of his words, encouraged him and
urged him on not to spare the nobles if he wished to please the many.

X. When Marius had crossed over to Libya, Metellus, giving way to his
jealousy, and vexed to see the crown and the triumph, when he had
already completed the war and it only remained to seize the person of
Jugurtha, taken from him by another, a man too who had raised himself
to power by ingratitude to his benefactor, would not stay to meet
Marius, but privately left the country, and Rutilius, one of his
legati, gave up the army to the new consul. But at last retribution
for his conduct overtook Marius; for he was deprived of the glory of
his victories by Sulla, just in the same way as he had deprived
Metellus of his credit: and how this happened I will state briefly,
since the particular circumstances are told more at length in the Life
of Sulla. Bocchus, who was king of the barbarians in the interior, and
the father-in-law of Jugurtha, showed no great disposition to help him
in his wars, because of the faithlessness of Jugurtha, and also
because he feared the increase of his power. But when Jugurtha, who
was now a fugitive from place to place, made Bocchus his last resource
and took refuge with him, Bocchus received his son-in-law more from a
regard to decency, as he was a suppliant, than from any goodwill, and
kept him in his hands; and while he openly interceded with Marius on
behalf of Jugurtha, and wrote to say that he would not surrender him
and assumed a high tone, he secretly entertained treacherous designs
against Jugurtha, and sent for Lucius Sulla, who was the Quæstor of
Marius, and had done some service to Bocchus during the campaign.
Sulla confidently went to Bocchus, but the barbarian, who had changed
his intentions and repented of his design, for several days wavered in
his plan, hesitating whether he should deliver up Jugurtha or keep
Sulla a prisoner: at last, however, he determined to carry into effect
his original design, and surrendered Jugurtha into the hands of Sulla.
Thus was sown the seed of that irreconcilable and violent animosity
between Marius and Sulla which nearly destroyed Rome: many claimed the
credit of this transaction for Sulla on account of their dislike of
Marius, and Sulla himself had a seal-ring made, which he used to on
which there was a representation of the surrender of Jugurtha by
Bocchus. By constantly wearing this ring Sulla irritated Marius, who
was an ambitious and quarrelsome man, and could endure no partner in
his glory. But the enemies of Marius gave Sulla most encouragement by
attributing to Metellus the credit of the first and best part of the
war, and that of the latter part and the conclusion to Sulla, their
object being to lower Marius in public estimation and to withdraw the
people from their exclusive attachment to him.

XI. But this envy and hatred and these calumnies against Marius were
dissipated and removed by the danger which threatened Italy from the
west, as soon as the State saw that she needed a great commander and
had to look about for a pilot whose skill should save her from such a
torrent of foes; for no one would allow any of the men of noble birth
or wealthy families to offer themselves at the Comitia, and Marius, in
his absence from Rome, was declared consul. It happened that the
Romans had just received intelligence of the capture of Jugurtha when
the reports about the Cimbri[70] and Teutones surprised them, and
though the rumours as to the numbers and strength of the invaders were
at first disbelieved, it afterwards appeared that they fell short of
the truth. Three hundred thousand armed fighting men were advancing,
bringing with them a much larger number of women and children, in
quest of land to support so mighty a multitude and of cities to dwell
in, after the example of the Celtæ[71] before them, who took the best
part of Italy from the Tyrrheni and kept it. As these invaders had no
intercourse with other nations, and had traversed an extensive tract
of country, it could not be ascertained who they were or where they
issued from to descend upon Gaul and Italy like a cloud. The most
probable conjecture was that they were Germanic nations belonging to
those who extended as far as the northern ocean; and this opinion was
founded on their great stature, their blue eyes, and on the fact that
the Germans designate robbers by the name of Cimbri. Others thought
that Celtica extended in a wide and extensive tract from the external
sea and the subarctic regions to the rising sun and the Lake
Mæotis,[72] where it bordered on Pontic Scythia; and it was from this
region, as they supposed, where the tribes are mingled, that these
invaders came, and that they did not advance in one expedition nor yet
uninterruptedly, but that every spring they moved forwards, fighting
their way, till in the course of time they traversed the whole
continent. Accordingly while the barbarians had several names
according to their respective tribes, they designated the whole body
by the name of Celtoscythians. But others say that the Cimmerians,
with whom the ancient Greeks were first acquainted, were no large
portion of the whole nation, but merely a tribe[73] or faction that
was driven out by the Scythians and passed into Asia from the Lake
Mæotis, under the command of Lygdamis: they further say that the chief
part of the Scythian nation and the most warlike part lived at the
very verge of the continent, on the coast of the external sea, in a
tract shaded, woody, and totally sunless, owing to the extent and
closeness of the forests, which reach into the interior as far as the
Hercynii[74]; and with respect to the heavens, their position was in
that region where the pole[75], having a great elevation owing to the
inclination of the parallels, appears to be only a short distance from
the spectator's zenith, and the days and nights are of equal length
and share the year between them, which furnished Homer[76] with the
occasion for his story of Ulysses visiting the ghosts. From these
parts then some supposed that these barbarians came against Italy, who
were originally Cimmerii, but then not inappropriately called Cimbri.
But all this is rather founded on conjecture than on sure historical
evidence. As to the numbers of the invaders, they are stated by many
authorities as above rather than below the amount that has been
mentioned. But their courage and daring made them irresistible, and in
battle they rushed forward with the rapidity and violence of fire, so
that no nations could stand their attack, but all the people that came
in their way became their prey and booty, and many powerful Roman
armies[77] with their commanders, which were stationed to protect Gaul
north of the Alps, perished ingloriously; and indeed these armies by
their unsuccessful resistance mainly contributed to direct the course
of the enemy against Rome. For when they had defeated those who
opposed them and got abundance of booty, they determined not to settle
themselves permanently anywhere till they had destroyed Rome and
ravaged Italy.

XII. Hearing this news from many quarters, the Romans called Marius
to the command; and he was elected consul the second time, though it
was contrary to a positive law for a man in his absence, and without a
certain interval of time, to be elected again, but the people would
not listen to those who made any opposition to the election. For they
considered that this would not be the first time that the law had
given way to convenience, and that the present was as good an occasion
for such an irregularity as the election of Scipio[78] as consul at a
time when they were under no apprehension about the ruin of Rome, but
merely wished to destroy Carthage. Accordingly these reasons
prevailed, and Marius, after crossing the sea with his army to Rome,
received the consulship, and celebrated his triumph on the calends of
January, which with the Romans is the beginning of the year, and
exhibited to them a sight they never expected to see, Jugurtha in
chains; for no one had ever ventured to hope that the Romans could
conquer their enemies while he was alive; so dexterous was Jugurtha in
turning all events to the best advantage, and so much courage did he
combine with great cunning. But it is said that being led in the
triumph made him lose his senses. After the triumph he was thrown into
prison, and while some were tearing his clothes from his body, others
who were anxious to secure his golden ear-rings pulled them off and
the lobe of the ear with them; in this plight being thrust down naked
into a deep hole, in his frenzy, with a grinning laugh, he cried out,
O Hercules, how cold your bath is! After struggling with famine for
six days and to the last moment clinging to the wish to preserve his
life, he paid the penalty due to his monstrous crimes. It is said that
there were carried in the triumphal procession three thousand and
seven pounds of gold, of silver uncoined five thousand seven hundred
and seventy-five, and in coined money two hundred and eighty-seven
thousand drachmæ. After the procession Marius assembled the Senate in
the Capitol, and either through inadvertence or vulgar exultation at
his good fortune he entered the place of meeting in his triumphal
dress. But observing that the Senate took offence at this, he went
out, and putting on the ordinary robe with the purple border, he
returned to the assembly.

XIII. On his expedition to meet the Cimbri, Marius continually
exercised his forces in various ways in running and in forced marches;
he also compelled every man to carry all his baggage and to prepare
his own food, in consequence of which men who were fond of toil, and
promptly and silently did what they were ordered, were called Marian
mules. Some, however, think that this name had a different origin; as
follows:--When Scipio was blockading Numantia, he wished to inspect
not only the arms and the horses, but also the mules and waggons, in
order to see in what kind of order and condition the soldiers kept
them. Marius accordingly produced his horse, which he had kept in
excellent condition with his own hand, and also a mule, which for good
appearance, docility, and strength far surpassed all the rest. The
general was much pleased with the beasts of Marius and often spoke
about them, which gave rise to the scoffing epithet of Marian mule,
when the subject of commendation was a persevering, enduring, and
labour-loving man.

XIV. Marius was favoured by a singular piece of good fortune; for
there was a reflux in the course of the barbarians, and the torrent
flowed towards Iberia before it turned to Italy, which gave Marius
time to discipline the bodies of his men and to confirm their courage;
and what was most of all, it gave the soldiers an opportunity of
knowing what kind of a man their general was. For the first impression
created by his sternness and by his inexorable severity in punishing,
was changed into an opinion of the justice and utility of his
discipline when they had been trained to avoid all cause of offence
and all breach of order; and the violence of his temper, the harshness
of his voice, and ferocious expression of his countenance, when the
soldiers became familiarised with them, appeared no longer formidable
to them, but only terrific to their enemies. But his strict justice in
all matters that came before him for judgment pleased the soldiers
most of all; and of this the following instance is mentioned, Caius
Lusius, who was a nephew of Marius, and was an officer in the army,
was in other respects a man of no bad character, but fond of beautiful
youths. This Caius conceived a passion for one of the young men who
served under him, by name Trebonius, and had often ineffectually
attempted to seduce him. At last Caius one night sent a servant with
orders to bring Trebonius; the young man came, for he could not refuse
to obey the summons, and was introduced into the tent; but when Caius
attempted to use violence towards him, he drew his sword and killed
him. Marius was not present when this happened, but on his arrival he
brought Trebonius to trial. There were many to join in supporting the
accusation, and not one to speak in his favour, but Trebouius boldly
came forward and told the whole story; and he produced witnesses who
proved that he had often resisted the importunities of Lusius, and
that though great offers had been made, he had never prostituted
himself; on which Marius, admiring his conduct, ordered a crown to be
brought, such as was conferred for noble deeds according to an old
Roman fashion, and he took it and put it on the head of Trebonius as a
fit reward for so noble an act at a time when good examples were much
needed. The news of this, reaching Rome, contributed in no small
degree to the consulship being conferred on Marius for the third time;
the barbarians also were expected about the spring of the year, and
the Romans did not wish to try the issue of a battle with them under
any other commander. However, the barbarians did not come so soon as
they were expected, and the period of the consulship of Marius again
expired. As the Comitia were at hand, and his colleague had died,
Marius came to Rome, leaving Manius Aquilius in the command of the
army. There were many candidates of great merit for the consulship,
but Lucius Saturninus, one of the tribunes, who had most influence
with the people, was gained over by Marius; and in his harangues he
advised them to elect Marius consul. Marius indeed affected to decline
the honour, and begged to be excused; he said he did not wish for it;
on which Saturninus called him a traitor to his country for refusing
the command at so critical a time. Now though it was apparent that
Saturninus was playing a part at the bidding of Marius, and in such a
way that nobody was deceived, still the many seeing that the
circumstances required a man of his energy and good fortune, voted for
the fourth consulship of Marius, and gave him for colleague Catulus
Lutatius, a man who was esteemed by the nobility and not disliked by
the people.

XV. Marius, hearing that the enemy was near, quickly crossed the Alps,
and established a fortified camp near the river Rhodanus[79] (Rhône),
which he supplied with abundance of stores, that he might not be
compelled against his judgment to fight a battle for want of
provisions. The conveyance of the necessary stores for the army, which
hitherto was tedious and expensive on the side of the sea, he rendered
easy and expeditious. The mouths of the Rhodanus, owing to the action
of the waves, received a great quantity of mud and sand, mixed with
large masses of clay, which were formed into banks by the force of the
water, and the entrance of the river was thus made difficult and
laborious and shallow for the vessels that brought supplies. As the
army had nothing to do, Marius brought the soldiers here and commenced
a great cut, into which he diverted a large part of the river, and, by
making the new channel terminate at a convenient point on the coast,
he gave it a deep outlet which had water enough for large vessels, and
was smooth and safe against wind and wave. This cut still bears the
name of Marius. The barbarians had now divided themselves into two
bodies, and it fell to the lot of the Cimbri to march through the
country of the Norici,[80] over the high land against Catulus, and to
force that passage: the Teutones and Ambrones were to march through
the Ligurian country along the sea to meet Marius. Now on the part of
the Cimbri there was some loss of time and delay; but the Teutones and
Ambrones set out forthwith, and speedily traversing the space which
separated them from the Romans, they made their appearance in numbers
countless, hideous in aspect, and in language and the cries they
uttered unlike any other people. They covered a large part of the
plain, where they pitched their tents and challenged Marius to battle.

XVI. Marius cared not for all this, but he kept his soldiers within
their entrenchments and severely rebuked those who made a display of
their courage, calling such as through passion were eager to break out
and fight, traitors to their country; he said it was not triumphs or
trophies which should now be the object of their ambition, but how
they should ward off so great a cloud and tempest of war, and secure
the safety of Italy. This was the way in which he addressed the
commanders in particular and the officers. The soldiers he used to
station on the rampart in turns, and bid them look at the enemy, and
thus he accustomed them to the aspect of the barbarians and their
strange and savage shouts, and to make themselves acquainted with
their armour and movements, so that in course of time what appeared
formidable to their imagination would become familiar by being often
seen. For it was the opinion of Marius that mere strangeness adds many
imaginary dangers to real danger; but that through familiarity even
real dangers lose their terrors. Now the daily sight of the enemy not
only took away somewhat of the first alarm, but the threats of the
barbarians and their intolerable arrogance roused the courage of the
Roman soldiers and inflamed their passions, for the enemy plundered
and devastated all the country around, and often attacked the
ramparts with much insolence and temerity, so that the words and
indignant expressions of the soldiers were repeated to Marius. The
soldiers asked, "If Marius had discovered any cowardice in them, that
he kept them from battle, like women under lock and key? Why should we
not, like free men, ask him whether he is waiting for others to fight
for Italy, and intends to employ us always as labourers when there may
be occasion to dig canals, to clear out mud, and to divert the course
of rivers? It was for this, as it seems, that he disciplined us in so
many toils; and these are the exploits of his consulship, which he
will exhibit to the citizens when he returns to Rome. Does he fear the
fate of Carbo and Cæpio, who were defeated by the enemy? But they were
far inferior to Marius in reputation and merit, and they were at the
head of much inferior armies. And it is better to do something, even
if we perish like them, than to sit here and see the lands of our
allies plundered."

XVII. Marius, who was pleased to hear such expressions as these,
pacified the soldiers by saying that he did not distrust them, but was
waiting for the time and the place of victory pursuant to certain
oracles. And in fact he carried about with him in a litter, with great
tokens of respect, a Syrian woman named Martha,[81] who was said to
possess the gift of divination, and he sacrificed pursuant to her
directions. This woman had formerly applied to the Senate, and offered
to foretell future events, but her proposal was rejected. Having got
access to the women, she allowed them to make trial of her skill; and
especially on one occasion, when she sat at the feet of the wife of
Marius, she was successful in foretelling what gladiators would win,
and this led to her being sent to Marius, who was much struck with her
skill. She generally accompanied the army in a litter, and assisted at
the sacrifices in a double purple robe fastened with a clasp, and
carrying a spear wreathed with ribands and chaplets. This exhibition
made many doubt whether Marius produced the woman in public because he
really believed in her, or whether he merely pretended to do so, and
played a part in the matter. But the affair of the vultures, which
Alexander[82] of Myndus has related, is certainly wonderful. Two
vultures were always seen hovering about the army before a victory,
and accompanying it; they were known by brass rings round their necks,
for the soldiers had caught the birds, and after putting on the rings
had let them go. Ever after this time as the soldiers recognised the
birds, they saluted them; and whenever the birds appeared on the
occasion of the army moving, the soldiers rejoiced, as they were
confident of success. Though there were many signs about this time,
all of them were of an ordinary kind, except what was reported from
Ameria and Tuder, two towns of Italy, where at night there was the
appearance in the heavens of fiery spears and shields, which at first
moved about in various directions, and then closed together,
exhibiting the attitudes and movements of men in battle; at last part
gave way, and the rest pressed on in pursuit, and all moved away to
the west. It happened that about the same time Batakes, the priest of
the Great Mother, came from Pessinus,[83] and reported that the
goddess from her shrine had declared to him that victory and the
advantage in war would be on the side of the Romans. The Senate
accepted the announcement and voted a temple to be built to the
goddess in commemoration of the anticipated victory; but when Batakes
presented himself to the popular assembly with the intention of making
the same report there, Aulus Pompeius, one of the tribunes, stopped
him, calling him an impostor, and contumeliously driving him from the
Rostra; which however contributed to gain most credit for the man's
assertions. For on the separation of the assembly, Aulus had no sooner
returned to his house than he was seized with so violent a fever that
he died within seven days; and the matter was notorious all through
Rome and the subject of much talk.

XVIII. Now Marius keeping quiet, the Teutones attempted to storm his
camp, but as many of them were struck by the missiles from the rampart
and some lost their lives, they resolved to march forward with the
expectation of safely crossing the Alps. Accordingly taking their
baggage, they passed by the Roman camp. Then indeed some notion could
be formed of their numbers by the length of their line and the time
which they took to march by; for it is said that they continued to
move past the encampment of Marius for six days without interruption.
As they passed along, they asked the Romans with a laugh, if they had
any message to send to their wives, for they should soon be with them.
When the barbarians had marched by and advanced some distance, Marius
also broke up his camp and followed close after them, always halting
near the enemy, but carefully fortifying his camp and making his
position strong in front, so that he could pass the night in safety.
Thus advancing, the two armies came to the Aquæ Sextiæ,[84] from which
a short march would bring them into the region of the Alps.
Accordingly Marius prepared for battle here, and he selected a
position which was strong enough, but ill-supplied with water, with a
view, as it is said, of thereby exciting his soldiers to come to an
engagement. However this may be, when some of them were complaining
and saying they should suffer from thirst, he pointed to a stream
which ran near the barbarian camp, and said they might get drink from
there, but the price was blood. Why then, they replied, don't you
forthwith lead us against the enemy, while our blood is still moist?
Marius calmly replied, "We must first secure our camp."

XXI. The Romans accordingly awaiting the enemy's attack, and coming to
close quarters with them, checked their advance up the hill, and the
barbarians, being hard pressed, gradually retreated to the plain, and
while those in the van were rallying on the level ground, there was a
shout and confusion in the rear. For Marcellus had not let the
critical moment pass by, but when the shouts rose above the hills,
bidding his men spring from their ambush at a rapid pace and with loud
shouts he fell on the enemy's rear and began to cut them down. Those
in the rear communicating the alarm to those in front of them, put the
whole army into confusion, and after sustaining this double attack for
no long time, they broke their ranks and fled. In the pursuit the
Romans took prisoners and killed to the number of above one hundred
thousand:[87] they also took their tents, waggons, and property, all
which, with the exception of what was pilfered, was given to Marius,
by the unanimous voice of the soldiers. But though he received so
magnificent a present, it was thought that he got nothing at all
proportioned to his services, considering the magnitude of the danger.
Some authorities do not agree with the statement as to the gift of the
spoil, nor yet about the number of the slain. However, they say that
the people of Massalia[88] made fences round their vineyards with the
bones, and that the soil, after the bodies had rotted and the winter
rains had fallen, was so fertilised and saturated with the putrefied
matter which sank down into it, that it produced a most unusual crop
in the next season, and so confirmed the opinion of Archilochus[89]
that the land is fattened by human bodies. They say that extraordinary
rains generally follow great battles, whether it is that some divine
power purifies the ground, and drenches it with waters from heaven, or
that the blood and putrefaction send up a moist and heavy vapour which
condenses the atmosphere, which is lightly moved and readily changed
to the greatest degree from the smallest cause.

XXII. After the battle, Marius caused to be collected the arms and
spoils of the barbarians which were conspicuous for ornament, and
unbroken, and suited to make a show in his triumphal procession: all
the rest he piled up in a great heap, for the celebration of a
splendid religious festival. The soldiers were already standing by in
their armour, with chaplets on their heads, and Marius having put on
the robe with the purple border, and fastened it up about him in the
Roman fashion, had taken a burning torch, and holding it up to heaven
with both his hands, was going to set fire[90] to the heap, when some
friends were seen riding quickly towards him, which caused a deep
silence and general expectation. When the horsemen were near, they
leaped down and greeted Marius with the news that he was elected
consul for the fifth time, and they delivered him letters to this
effect. This cause of great rejoicing being added to the celebration
of the victory, the army transported with delight sent forth one
universal shout, accompanied with the noise and clatter of their arms,
and the officers crowned Marius afresh with a wreath of bay, on which
he set fire to the heap, and completed the ceremony.

XXIII. But that power which permits no great good fortune to give a
pleasure untempered and pure, and diversifies human life with a
mixture of evil and of good--be it Fortune[91] or Nemesis, or the
necessary nature of things--in a few days brought to Marius
intelligence about his companion in command, Catulus, involving Rome
again in alarm and tempest, like a cloud which overcasts a clear and
serene sky. For Catulus, whose commission was to oppose the Cimbri,
determined to give up the defence of the passes of the Alps, for fear
that he might weaken his force if he were obliged to divide it too
much. Accordingly he forthwith descended into the plains of Italy, and
placing the river Atiso[92] (Adige) in his front, strongly fortified a
position on each side of the river, to hinder the enemy from crossing
it; and he also threw a bridge over the river, in order that he might
be enabled to support those on the farther side, if the barbarians
should make their way through the passes and attack the forts. The
enemy had so much contempt for the Romans and such confidence, that,
with the view rather of displaying their strength and courage than
because it was necessary, they endured the snow-storms without any
covering, and made their way through the snow and ice to the summits
of the mountains, when, placing their broad shields under them, they
slid down the slippery precipices over the huge rocks. When they had
encamped near the river, and examined the ford, they began to dam up
the stream, and tearing up the neighbouring hills, like the giants of
old, they carried whole trees with their roots, fragments of rock, and
mounds of earth into the river, and stopped its course; they also let
heavy weights float down the stream, which drove against the piles
that supported the bridge and shook it by the violence of the blows;
all which so terrified the Romans, that most of them deserted the
large encampment and took to flight. Then Catulus, like a good and
perfect general, showed that he valued the reputation of his
countrymen more than his own. Not being able to induce his soldiers to
stand, and seeing that they were making off in alarm, he ordered the
eagle[93] to be moved, and running to those who were first in the
retreat, he put himself at their head, wishing the disgrace to fall on
himself and not on his country, and that the army should not appear to
be flying, but to be following their general in his retreat. The
barbarians attacked and took the fort on the farther side of the
Atiso, though the Roman soldiers defended it with the utmost bravery
and in a manner worthy of their country. Admiring their courage, the
barbarians let them go on conditions which were sworn to upon the
brazen bull, which was taken after the battle, and, it is said, was
conveyed to the house of Catulus as the first spoils of the victory.
The country being now undefended, the barbarians scoured it in every
direction and laid it waste.

XXIV. After this Marius was called to Rome. On his arrival it was
generally expected that he would celebrate his triumph, and the Senate
had without any hesitation voted him one; but he refused it, either
because he did not wish to deprive his soldiers and his companions in
arms of the honour that was due to them, or because he wished to give
the people confidence in the present emergency by intrusting to the
Fortune of the State the glory of his first victory, with the
confident hope that she would return it to him ennobled by a second.
Having said what was suitable to the occasion, he set out to join
Catulus, whom he encouraged, and at the same time he summoned his
soldiers from Gaul. On the arrival of the troops, Marius crossed the
Eridanus (Po), and endeavoured to keep the barbarians from that part
of Italy which lay south of the river. The Cimbri declined a battle,
because, as they said, they were waiting for the Teutones, and
wondered they were so long in coming; but it is doubtful whether they
were still really ignorant of their destruction or merely pretended
not to believe it. However, they handled most cruelly those who
brought the report of the defeat; and they sent to Marius to demand
land for themselves and their brethren, and a sufficient number of
cities for their abode. On Marius asking the ambassadors of the Cimbri
whom they meant by their brethren, and being told they were the
Teutones, all the Romans who were present burst out in a laugh, but
Marius, with a sneer, replied, "Don't trouble yourself about your
brethren: they have land, and they shall have it for ever, for we have
given it to them." The ambassadors, who understood his irony, fell to
abusing him, and threatened that the Cimbri would forthwith have their
revenge, and the Teutones too, as soon as they should arrive. "They
are here already," said Marius; "and it won't be right for you to go
before you have embraced your brethren." Saying this he ordered the
kings of the Teutones to be produced in their chains; for they were
taken in the Alps in their flight by the Sequani[94].

XXV. On this being reported to the Cimbri, they forthwith advanced
against Marius, who however kept quiet and remained in his camp. It
is said that it was on the occasion of this engagement that Marius
introduced the alteration in the spears.[95] Before this time that
part of the wooden shaft which was let into the iron was fastened with
two iron nails; Marius kept one of the nails as it was, but he had the
other taken out and a wooden peg, which would be easily broken, put in
its place; the design being that the spear when it had struck the
enemy's shield should not remain straight, for when the wooden nail
broke, the iron head would bend, and the spear, owing to the twist in
the metal part, would still hold to the shield, and so drag along the
ground. Now Boeorix, the king of the Cimbri, with a very few men about
him, riding up to the camp, challenged Marius to fix a day and place,
and to come out and settle the claim to the country by a battle.
Marius replied, that the Romans never took advice of their enemies as
to fighting; however, he would gratify the Cimbri in this matter, and
accordingly they agreed on the third day from the present, and the
battle-field was to be the plain of Vercellæ[96], which was suited for
the Roman cavalry, and would give the Cimbri full room for their
numbers. When the appointed day came, the Romans prepared for battle
with the enemy. Catulus[97] had twenty-two thousand three hundred men,
and Marius thirty-two thousand, which were distributed on each flank
of Catulus, who occupied the centre, as Sulla[98] has recorded, who
was in the battle. Sulla also says, that Marius expected that the
line would be engaged chiefly at the extremities and on the wings, and
with the view of appropriating the victory to his own soldiers, and
that Catulus might have no part in the contest, and not come to close
quarters with the enemy, he took advantage of the hollow front of the
centre, which usually results when the line is extended, and
accordingly divided and placed his forces as already stated. Some
writers say that Catulus himself also made a statement to the like
effect, in his apology about the battle, and accused Marius of want of
good faith to him. The infantry of the Cimbri marched slowly from
their fortified posts in a square, each side of which was thirty
stadia: the cavalry, fifteen thousand in number, advanced in splendid
style, wearing helmets which resembled in form the open mouths of
frightful beasts and strange-shaped heads, surmounted by lofty crests
of feathers, which made them appear taller; they had also breastplates
of iron and white glittering shields. Their practice was to discharge
two darts,[99] and then closing with the enemy, to use their large
heavy swords.

XXVI. On this occasion the enemy's cavalry did not advance straight
against the Romans, but deviating to the right they attempted to draw
the Romans little by little in that direction, with the view of
attacking them when they had got them between themselves and their
infantry, which was on the left. The Roman generals perceived the
manoeuvre, but they could not stop their soldiers, for there was a cry
from some one that the enemy was flying, and immediately the whole
army rushed to the pursuit. In the meantime the barbarian infantry
advanced like a huge sea in motion. Then Marius, washing his hands and
raising them to heaven, vowed a hecatomb to the gods; and Catulus also
in like manner raising his hands, vowed to consecrate[100] the fortune
of that day. It is said that when Marius had sacrificed and had
inspected the victims, he cried out with a loud voice, "Mine is the
Victory." When the attack had commenced, an incident happened to
Marius which may be considered as a divine retribution, as Sulla says.
An immense cloud of dust being raised, as was natural, and having
covered the two armies, it happened that Marius, rushing to the
pursuit with his men after him, missed the enemy, and being carried
beyond their line, was for some time in the plain without knowing
where he was; but it happened that the barbarians closed with Catulus,
and the struggle was with him and his soldiers chiefly, among whom
Sulla says that he himself fought: he adds, that the heat aided the
Romans, and the sun, which shone full in the face of the Cimbri. For
the barbarians were well inured to cold, having been brought up in
forests, as already observed, and a cool country, but they were
unnerved with the heat, which made them sweat violently and breathe
hard, and put their shields before their faces, for the battle took
place after the summer solstice, and, according to the Roman
reckoning, three days before the new moon of the month now called
Augustus[101], but then Sextilis. The dust also which covered their
enemies helped to encourage the Romans; for they did not see their
number at a distance, but running forward they engaged severally man
to man with the enemy, without having been alarmed by the sight of
them. And so well were the bodies of the Romans inured to toil and
exertion, that not one of them was seen to sweat or pant, though the
heat was excessive and they came to the shock of battle running at
full speed, as Catulus is said to have reported to the honour of his
soldiers.

XXVII. Now the greater part of the enemy and their best soldiers were
cut to pieces in their ranks, for in order to prevent the line from
being broken the soldiers of the first rank were fastened together by
long chains which were passed through their belts. The fugitives were
driven back to their encampments, when a most tragic scene was
exhibited. The women standing on the waggons clothed in black
massacred the fugitives, some their husbands, and others their
brothers and fathers, and then strangling their infants they threw
them under the wheels and the feet of the beasts of burden, and killed
themselves. It is said that one woman hung herself from the end of the
pole of a waggon with her children fastened to her feet by cords; and
that the men, not finding any trees near, tied themselves to the horns
of the oxen and some to their feet, and then goading the animals to
make them plunge about, were dragged and trampled till they died. But
though so many perished in this manner, above sixty thousand were
taken prisoners, and the number of those who fell was said to be twice
as many. Now all the valuable property became the booty of the
soldiers of Marius, but the military spoils and standards and
trumpets, it is said, were carried to the tent of Catulus; and Catulus
relied chiefly on this as a proof that the victory was gained by his
men. A dispute having arisen among the soldiers, as might be expected,
some ambassadors from Parma[102] who were present were chosen to act
as arbitrators, and the soldiers of Catulus leading them among the
dead bodies of the enemy, pointed out that the barbarians were pierced
by their spears, which were recognised by the marks on them, for
Catulus had taken care to have his name cut on the shafts.
Notwithstanding this, the whole credit was given to Marius, both on
account of the previous victory and his superior rank.[103] And what
was most of all, the people gave him the title of the third
founder[104] of Rome, considering that the danger which he had averted
was not less than that of the Gallic invasion, and in their rejoicings
with their wives and children at home they coupled Marius with the
gods in the religious ceremonies that preceded the banquet and in
their libations, and they thought that he alone ought to celebrate
both triumphs. Marius, however, did not triumph alone, but Catulus
shared the honour, for Marius wished to show that he was not elated by
his victories: there was another reason also; he was afraid of the
soldiers, who were prepared not to let Marius triumph, if Catulus were
deprived of the honour.

XXVIII. Though Marius was now discharging his fifth consulship, he was
more anxious to obtain a sixth than others are about the first; and he
endeavoured to gain favour by courting the people and giving way to
the many in order to please them, wherein he went further than was
consistent with the state and dignity of the office, and further than
suited his own temper, for he wished to show himself very compliant
and a man of the people, when in fact his character was altogether
different. Now it is said that in all civil matters and amid the noise
of the popular assemblies Marius was entirely devoid of courage, which
arose from his excessive love of applause; and the undaunted spirit
and firmness which he showed in battle failed him before the people,
where he was disconcerted by the most ordinary expressions of praise
or censure. However, the following story is told of him: Marius had
presented with the citizenship a thousand of the people of Camerinum,
who had particularly distinguished themselves in the war; this was
considered to be an illegal proceeding, and being charged with it by
several persons in public, he replied that he could not hear the law
for the din of arms. Still it is well known that he was discomposed
and alarmed by the shouts in the popular assemblies. In military
matters, it is true, he received great deference and had much
influence, because his services were wanted; but in civil business he
was cut off from attaining the first distinction, and accordingly
there was nothing left for him but to gain the affection and favour of
the many; and in order to become the first man at Rome, he sacrificed
all claim to be considered the best. The consequence was, that he was
at variance with all the aristocratical party, but he feared Metellus
most, who had experienced his ingratitude, and, as a man of sterling
worth, was the natural enemy of those who attempted to insinuate
themselves into the popular favour by dishonourable means, and who had
no other object than to flatter the people. Accordingly Marius formed
a design to eject Metellus from the city; and for this purpose he
allied himself with Glaucia and Saturninus,[105] who were daring men,
and had at their command a rabble of needy and noisy fellows, and he
made them his tools in introducing his measures. He also stirred up
the soldiers, and by mixing them with the people in the assemblies he
overpowered Metellus with his faction. Rutilius,[106] who is a lover
of truth and an honest man, though he was a personal enemy of Marius,
relates in his history, that by giving large sums of money to the
tribes and buying their votes Marius kept Metellus out, and that
Valerius Flaccus was rather the servant than the colleague of Marius
in his sixth consulship. However, the people, never conferred the
office of consul so often on any man except Corvinus Valerius;[107]
though it is said that forty-five years elapsed between the first and
last consulship of Corvinus, while Marius after his first consulship
enjoyed the remaining five in uninterrupted succession.

XXIX. It was in his last consulship that Marius got most odium, from
his participating in many of the violent measures of Saturninus. One
of them was the assassination of Nonius,[108] whom Saturninus
murdered because he was a rival candidate for the tribuneship.
Saturninus, being made a tribune, introduced a measure about the land,
to which[109] was added a clause that the Senate should come forward
and swear that they would abide by whatever the people should vote,
and would make no opposition. In the Senate Marius made a show of
opposing this clause in the proposed law, and he said that he would
not take the oath, nor did he think that any man in his senses would,
for if the law was not a bad one, it was an insult for the Senate to
be compelled to make such concession, instead of giving their consent
voluntarily. What he said, however, was not his real mind, but his
object was to involve Metellus in a difficulty which he could not
evade. For Marius, who considered falsehood to be a part of virtue and
skill, had no intention to observe what he had promised to the Senate;
but as he knew that Metellus was a man of his word, and considered
truth, as Pindar calls it, the foundation of great virtue, he wished
to entrap Metellus into a refusal before the Senate, and as he would
consequently decline taking the oath, he designed in this way to make
him odious to the people for ever: and it fell out so. Upon Metellus
declaring that he would never take the oath, the Senate separated; but
a few days after, Saturninus summoned the Senators to the Rostra, and
urged them to take the oath. When Marius came forward there was
profound silence, and all eyes were turned upon him to see what he
would do. Marius, however, forgetting all his bold expressions before
the Senate, said his neck was not broad enough for him to be the first
to give his opinion on so weighty a matter all at once, and that he
would take the oath and obey the law, if it was a law; which condition
he cunningly added as a cloak to his shame. The people, delighted at
Marius taking the oath, clapped their hands and applauded, but the
nobility were much dejected and hated Marius for his tergiversation.
However, all the senators took the oath in order, through fear of the
people, till it came to the turn of Metellus, and though his friends
urged and entreated him to take the oath and so to avoid the severe
penalties which the law of Saturninus enacted against those who
refused, he would not swerve from his purpose or take the oath, but
adhering firmly to his principles and prepared to submit to any
penalty rather than do a mean thing, he left the Forum, saying to
those about him, that to do a wrong thing was mean, to act honourably
when there was no danger was in any man's power, but that it was the
characteristic of a good man to do what was right, even when it was
accompanied with risk. Upon this Saturninus put it to the vote that
the consuls should proclaim Metellus to be excluded from fire,[110]
water, and house; and the most worthless part of the populace was
ready to put him to death. Now all the men of honourable feeling,
sympathising with Metellus, crowded round him, but Metellus would not
allow any commotion to be raised on his account, and he quitted the
city like a wise and prudent man, saying, "Either matters will mend
and the people will change their minds, when I shall be invited to
return, or if things stay as they are, it is best to be out of the
way." What testimonies of affection and respect Metellus received in
his exile, and how he spent his time at Rhodes in philosophical
studies, will be better told in his Life.

XXX. Now Marius did not perceive what incurable mischief he had done,
for in return for the services of Saturninus[111] he was obliged to
wink at his audacious and violent measures, and to remain quiet while
Saturninus was evidently aiming at the supreme power and the
subversion of the constitution by force of arms and blood-shed.
Between his fear of the disapprobation of the nobles and his wish to
retain the favour of the people, Marius was reduced to an act of
extreme meanness and duplicity. The first men in the State came to him
by night and urged him to act against Saturninus, whom Marius,
however, received by another door without their knowledge; and
pretending to both parties that he was troubled with a looseness, he
went backwards and forwards in the house between the nobles and
Saturninus, running first to one and then to the other, and
endeavouring to rouse and irritate them mutually. However, when the
Senate and the Equites began to combine and express their indignation,
he drew out the soldiers into the Forum, and driving the party of
Saturninus to the Capitol, he compelled them to submit for fear of
dying of thirst, by cutting off the pipes that supplied them with
water. The partisans of Saturninus in despair called out to Marius and
surrendered on the Public Faith, as the Romans term it. Marius did all
he could to save their lives, but without effect, for as soon as they
came down to the Forum they were massacred. These events made him
odious both to the nobles and the people, and when the time for
electing censors came, contrary to all expectation he did not offer
himself as a candidate, but allowed men of inferior rank to be
elected, fearing he might be rejected. He, however, alleged as an
excuse, though it was not true, that he did not wish to make himself
many enemies by a rigid scrutiny into their lives and morals.

XXXI. A measure being proposed for recalling Metellus[112] from
exile, Marius did all he could to stop it both by word and deed, but
finding his opposition useless, he at last desisted. The people
received the proposed measure well, and Marius, who could not endure
to see the return of Metellus, set sail for Cappadocia and Galatia,
pretending that he wished to make the sacrifices he had vowed to the
Great Mother, but in reality having quite a different object in view,
which the people never suspected. Marius was naturally ill suited for
times of peace and for taking a part in civil affairs, as he had
attained his position merely by arms, and now thinking that he was
gradually losing his influence and reputation by doing nothing and
remaining quiet, he looked out for an opportunity of again being
actively employed. He hoped to be able to stir up the kings of Asia
and to rouse and stimulate Mithridates,[113] who was supposed to be
ready to go to war, in which case he expected to be appointed to take
the command against him, and so to fill the city with new triumphs,
and his house with Pontic spoils and the wealth of the king.
Accordingly, though Mithridates paid him all attention and honour,
Marius could not be bent from his purpose or induced to give way: his
only answer was, "King, either try to conquer the Romans or obey their
orders in silence;" an expression which startled the king, who had
often heard the language of the Romans, but then for the first time
heard their bold speech.

XXXIII. This war, which was diversified by many reverses and a great
variety of fortune, took from Marius as much reputation and influence
as it gave to Sulla. For Marius appeared slow in his plans, and on all
occasions rather over-cautious and tardy; whether it was that age had
quenched his wonted vigour and fire, for he was now in his sixty-sixth
year, or, as he alleged himself, his nerves were diseased and his body
was incapable of supporting fatigue, and yet from a feeling of honour
he endured the hardships of the campaign beyond his powers.
Notwithstanding this he won a great battle, in which he slaughtered
six thousand of the enemy, and he never allowed them the opportunity
of getting any advantage, but when he was intrenched in his camp he
submitted to be insulted by them and was never irritated by any
challenge to give them battle. It is recorded that Publius Silo,[115]
who had the highest reputation and influence of any man on the side of
the enemy, addressed him to this effect: "If you are a great general,
Marius, come down and fight;" to which Marius replied, "Nay, do you,
if you are a great general, compel me to fight against my will." And
again, on another occasion when the enemy presented a favourable
opportunity for attacking them, but the Romans lacked courage, and
both sides retired, he summoned his soldiers together, and said, "I
don't know whether to call the enemy or you greater cowards; for they
could not see your back, nor you their nape." At last, however, he
gave up the command, on the ground that his weakness rendered him
unable to endure the fatigue of the campaign.

XXXIV. The Italians had now given in, and many persons at Rome were
intriguing for the command in the Mithridatic war with the assistance
of the demagogues; but, contrary to all expectation, the tribune
Sulpicius,[116] a most audacious fellow, brought forward Marius and
proposed him as proconsul with power to prosecute the war against
Mithridates. The people indeed were divided, some being for Marius and
others in favour of Sulla; and they bade Marius go to the warm baths
of Baiæ[117] and look after his health, inasmuch as he was worn out
with old age and defluxions, as he admitted himself. Marius had in the
neighbourhood of Misenum a sumptuous house, furnished with luxuries
and accommodation too delicately for a man who had served in so many
wars and campaigns. It is said that Cornelia bought this house for
seventy-five thousand;[118] and that no long time after it was
purchased by Lucius Lucullus for two millions five hundred thousand;
so quickly did extravagant expenditure spring up and so great was the
increase of luxury. But Marius, moved thereto by boyish emulation,
throwing off his old age and his infirmities, went daily to the Campus
Martius, where he took his exercises with the young men, and showed
that he was still active in arms and sat firm in all the movements of
horsemanship, though he was not of a compact form in his old age, but
very fat and heavy. Some were pleased at his being thus occupied, and
they came down to the Campus to see and admire his emulation and his
exercises; but the wiser part lamented to witness his greediness after
gain and distinction, and they pitied a man who, having risen from
poverty to enormous wealth, and to the highest station from a low
degree, knew not when to put bounds to his good fortune, and was not
satisfied with being an object of admiration and quietly enjoying what
he had, but as if he was in want of everything, after his triumphs and
his honours was setting out to Cappadocia and the Euxine to oppose
himself in his old age to Archelaus and Neoptolemus, the satraps of
Mithridates. The reasons which Marius alleged against all this in
justification of himself appeared ridiculous; he said that he wished
to serve in the campaign in order to teach his son military
discipline.

XXXV. The disease that had long been rankling in the State at last
broke out, when Marius had found in the audacity of Sulpicius[119] a
most suitable instrument to effect the public ruin; for Sulpicius
admired and emulated Saturninus in everything, except that he charged
him with timidity and want of promptitude in his measures. But there
was no lack of promptitude on the part of Sulpicius, who kept six
hundred of the Equestrian class about him as a kind of body-guard and
called them an Opposition Senate. He also attacked with a body of
armed men the consuls while they were holding a public meeting; one of
the consuls made his escape from the Forum, but Sulpicius seized his
son and butchered him. Sulla, the other consul, being pursued, made
his escape into the house of Marius, where nobody would have expected
him to go, and thus avoided his pursuers who ran past; and it is said
that he was let out in safety by Marius by another door and so got to
the camp. But Sulla in his Memoirs says that he did not fly for refuge
to Marius, but withdrew there to consult with him about the matters
which Sulpicius was attempting to make him assent to against his will
by surrounding him with bare swords and driving him on towards the
house of Marius, and that finally he went from the house of Marius to
the Rostra, and removed, as they required him to do, the Justitium.
This being accomplished, Sulpicius, who had now gained a victory, got
the command conferred on Marius by the votes of the, assembly, and
Marius, who was prepared to set out, sent two tribunes to receive the
army of Sulla. But Sulla encouraging his soldiers, who were
thirty-five thousand men well armed, led them to Rome. The soldiers
fell on the tribunes whom Marius had sent, and murdered them. Marius
also put to death many of the friends of Sulla in Rome, and proclaimed
freedom to the slaves[120] if they would join him; but it is said that
only three slaves accepted the offer. He made but a feeble resistance
to Sulla on his entering the city, and was soon compelled to fly. On
quitting Rome he was separated from his partisans, owing to its being
dark, and he fled to Solonium,[121] one of his farms. He sent his son
Marius[122] to get provisions from the estates of his father-in-law
Mucius, which were not far off, and himself went to Ostia,[123] where
Numerius, one of his friends, had provided a vessel for him, and
without waiting for his son he set sail with his stepson Granius. The
young man arrived at the estates of Mucius, but he was surprised by
the approach of day while he was getting something together and
packing it up, and thus did not altogether escape the vigilance of his
enemies, for some cavalry came to the spot, suspecting that Marius
might be there. The overseer of the farm, seeing them approach, hid
Marius in a waggon loaded with beans, and yoking the oxen to it, he
met the horsemen on his road to the city with the waggon. Marius was
thus conveyed to the house of his wife, where he got what he wanted,
and by night made his way to the sea, and embarking in a vessel bound
for Libya, arrived there in safety.

XXXVI. The elder Marius was carried along the coast of Italy by a
favourable wind, but as he was afraid of one Geminius, a powerful man
in Terracina, and an enemy of his, he ordered the sailors to keep
clear of that place. The sailors were willing to do as he wished, but
the wind veering round and blowing from the sea with a great swell,
they were afraid that the vessel could not stand the beating of the
waves, and as Marius also was much troubled with sickness, they made
for land, and with great difficulty got to the coast near
Circeii.[124] As the storm increased and they wanted provisions, they
landed from the vessel and wandered about without any definite object,
but as happens in cases of great difficulty, seeking merely to escape
from the present evil as worst of all, and putting their hopes on the
chances of fortune; for the land was their enemy, and the sea also,
and they feared to fall in with men, and feared also not to fall in
with men, because they were in want of provisions. After some time
they met with a few herdsmen, who had nothing to give them in their
need, but they recognised Marius and advised him to get out of the way
as quickly as he could, for a number of horsemen had just been seen
there riding about in quest of him. Thus surrounded by every
difficulty and his attendants fainting for want of food, he turned
from the road, and plunging into a deep forest, passed the night in
great suffering. The next day, compelled by hunger and wishing to make
use of his remaining strength before he was completely exhausted, he
went along the shore, encouraging his followers, and entreating them
not to abandon the last hope, for which he reserved himself on the
faith of an old prediction. For when he was quite a youth and living
in the country, he caught in his garment an eagle's nest as it was
falling down, with seven young ones in it; which his parents wondering
at, consulted the soothsayers, who told them that their son would
become the most illustrious of men, and that it was the will of fate
that he should receive the supreme command and magistracy seven times.
Some affirm that this really happened to Marius; but others say that
those who were with Marius at this time and in the rest of his flight
heard the story from him, and believing it, recorded an event which is
altogether fabulous. For an eagle has not more than two young ones at
a time, and they say that Musæus[125] was mistaken when he wrote of
the eagle thus:--

Lays three, two hatches, and one tends with care.

But that Marius frequently during his flight, and when he was in the
extremest difficulties, said that he should survive to enjoy a seventh
consulship, is universally admitted.

XXXVII. They were now about twenty stadia from Minturnæ,[126] an
Italian city, when they saw at a distance a troop of horse riding
towards them, and as it chanced two merchant vessels sailing along the
coast. Running down to the sea as fast as they could and as their
strength would allow, and throwing themselves into the water, they
swam to the vessels. Granius having got into one of the vessels,
passed over to the island of Ænaria,[127] which is off that coast. But
Marius, who was heavy and unwieldy, was with difficulty held above the
water by two slaves and placed in the other vessel, the horsemen being
now close to them and calling from the shore to the sailors either to
bring the vessel to land or to throw Marius overboard, and to set sail
wherever they pleased. But as Marius entreated them with tears in his
eyes, those who had the command of the vessel, after changing their
minds as to what they should do as often as was possible in so short a
time, at last told the horsemen that they would not surrender Marius.
The horsemen rode off in anger, and the sailors again changing their
minds, came to land, and casting anchor at the mouth of the Liris,
which spreads out like a lake, they advised Marius to disembark and
take some food on land and to rest himself from his fatigues till a
wind should rise: they added, that it was the usual time for the
sea-breeze to decline, and for a fresh breeze to spring up from the
marshes. Marius did as they advised, and the sailors carried him out
of the vessel and laid him on the grass, little expecting what was to
follow. The sailors immediately embarking again and raising the
anchor, sailed off as fast as they could, not thinking it honourable
to surrender Marius or safe to protect him. In this situation,
deserted by everybody, he lay for some time silent on the shore, and
at last recovering himself with difficulty, he walked on with much
pain on account of there being no path. After passing through deep
swamps and ditches full of water and mud, he came to the hut of an old
man who worked in the marshes, and falling down at his feet, he
entreated him to save and help a man, who, if he escaped from the
present dangers, would reward him beyond all his hopes. The man, who
either knew Marius of old or saw something in the expression of his
countenance which indicated superior rank, said that his hut was
sufficient to shelter him if that was all he wanted, but if he was
wandering about to avoid his enemies, he could conceal him in a place
which was more retired. Upon Marius entreating him to do so, the old
man took him to the marsh, and bidding him lie down in a hole near the
river he covered Marius with reeds and other light things of the kind,
which were well adapted to hide him without pressing too heavily.

XXXVIII. After a short time a sound and noise from the hut reached the
ears of Marius. Geminius of Terracina had sent a number of men in
pursuit of him, some of whom, had chanced to come there, and were
terrifying the old man and rating him for having harboured and
concealed an enemy of the Romans. Marius, rising from his hiding-place
and stripping off his clothes, threw himself into the thick and muddy
water of the marsh; and this was the cause of his not escaping the
search of his pursuers, who dragged him out covered with mud, and
leading him naked to Minturnæ, gave him up to the magistrates. Now
instructions[128] had been already sent to every city, requiring the
authorities to search for Marius, and to put him to death when he was
taken. However, the magistrates thought it best to deliberate on the
matter first, and in the meantime they lodged Marius in the house of a
woman named Fannia,[129] who was supposed not to be kindly disposed
towards him on account of an old grudge. Fannia had a husband whose
name was Tinnius, and on separating from him she claimed her portion,
which was considerable. The husband charged her with adultery, and
Marius, who was then in his sixth consulship, presided as judge. But
on the trial it appeared that Fannia had been a loose woman, and that
her husband, though he knew it, took her to wife, and lived with her a
long time; accordingly, Marius being disgusted with both of them,
decreed that the man should return the woman's portion, but he imposed
on the woman, as a mark of infamy, a penalty of four copper
coins.[130] Fannia, however, did not on this occasion exhibit the
feeling of a woman who had been wronged, but when she saw Marius, far
from showing any resentment for the past, she did all that she could
for him under the circumstances, and encouraged him. Marius thanked
her, and said that he had good hopes, for a favourable omen had
occurred to him, which was something of this sort:--When they were
leading him along, and he was near the house of Fannia, the doors
being opened, an ass ran out to drink from a spring which was flowing
hard by: the ass, looking at Marius in the face with a bold and
cheerful air, at first stood opposite him, and then making a loud
braying, sprang past him frisking with joy. From this, Marius drew a
conclusion, as he said that the deity indicated that his safety would
come through the sea rather than through the land, for the ass did not
betake himself to dry food, but turned from him to the water. Having
said this to Fannia, he went to rest alone, bidding her close the door
of the apartment.

XXXIX. The magistrates[131] and council of Minturnæ, after
deliberating, resolved that there ought to be no delay, and that they
should put Marius to death. As none of the citizens would undertake to
do it, a Gallic or Cimbrian horse-soldier, for the story is told both
ways, took a sword and entered the apartment. Now that part of the
room in which Marius happened to be lying was not very well lighted,
but was in shade, and it is said that the eyes of Marius appeared to
the soldier to dart a strong flame, and a loud voice issued from the
gloom, "Man, do you dare to kill Caius Marius?" The barbarian
immediately took to flight, and throwing the sword down, rushed
through the door, calling out, "I cannot kill Caius Marius." This
caused a general consternation, which was succeeded by compassion and
change of opinion, and self-reproach for having come to so illegal and
ungrateful a resolution concerning a man who had saved Italy, and whom
it would be a disgrace not to assist. "Let him go, then," it was said,
"where he pleases, as an exile, and suffer in some other place
whatever fate has reserved for him. And let us pray that the gods
visit us not with their anger for ejecting Marius from our city in
poverty and rags." Moved by such considerations, all in a body entered
the room where Marius was, and getting round him, began to conduct him
to the sea. Though every man was eager to furnish something or other,
and all were busying themselves, there was a loss of time. The grove
of Marica, as it is called, obstructed the passage to the sea, for it
was an object of great veneration, and it was a strict rule to carry
nothing out of it that had ever been carried in; and now, if they
went all round it, there would of necessity be delay: but this
difficulty was settled by one of the older men at last calling out,
that no road was inaccessible or impassable by which Marius was saved;
and he was the first to take some of the things that they were
conveying to the ship and to pass through the place.

XL. Everything was soon got ready through these zealous exertions, and
a ship was supplied for Marius by one Belæus, who afterwards caused a
painting to be made representing these events, and dedicated it in the
temple. Marius embarking, was carried along by the wind, and by chance
was taken to the island Ænaria, where he found Granius and the rest of
his friends, and set sail with them for Libya. As their water failed,
they were compelled to touch at Erycina in Sicily. Now the Roman
quæstor, who happened to be about these parts on the look-out, was
very nearly taking Marius when he landed; and he killed about sixteen
of the men who were sent to get water. Marius, hastily embarking and
crossing the sea to the island of Meninx,[132] there learnt for the
first time that his son had escaped with Cethegus, and that they were
going to Iampsas (Hiempsal), king of the Numidians, to ask aid of him.
This news encouraged him a little, and he was emboldened to move from
the island to the neighbourhood of Carthage. At this time the governor
of Libya was Sextilius, a Roman, who had neither received injury nor
favour from Marius, and it was expected that he would help him, at
least as far as feelings of compassion move a man. But no sooner had
Marius landed with a few of his party, than an officer met him, and
standing right in front of him said, "The Governor Sextilius forbids
you, Marius, to set foot on Libya, and he says that if you do, he will
support the decree of the Senate by treating you as an enemy." On
hearing this, grief and indignation deprived Marius of utterance, and
he was a long time silent, looking fixedly at the officer. Upon the
officer asking Marius what he had to say, what reply he had for the
governor, he answered with a deep groan, "Tell him you have seen Caius
Marius a fugitive sitting on the ruins of Carthage": a reply in which
he not unaptly compared the fate of that city and his own changed
fortunes. In the meantime, Iampsas, the king of the Numidians, being
unresolved which way to act, treated young Marius and his companions
with respect, but still detained them on some new pretext whenever
they wished to leave; and it was evident that he had no fair object in
view in thus deferring their departure. However, an incident happened
of no uncommon kind, which brought about their deliverance. The
younger Marius was handsome, and one of the king's concubines was
grieved to see him in a condition unbefitting his station; and this
feeling of compassion was a beginning and motive towards love. At
first, however, Marius rejected the woman's proposals, but seeing that
there were no other means of escape, and that her conduct proceeded
from more serious motives than mere passion, he accepted her proffered
favours, and with her aid stole away with his friends and made his
escape to his father. After embracing one another, they went along the
shore, where they saw some scorpions fighting, which Marius considered
to be a bad omen. Accordingly they forthwith embarked in a fishing
boat, and passed over to the island Cercina, which was no great
distance from the mainland; and it happened that they had only just
set sail, when some horsemen despatched by the king were seen riding
to the spot where they embarked. Marius thus escaped a danger equal to
any that ever threatened him.

XLI. News reached Rome that Sulla was encountering the generals of
Mithridates in Bœotia, while the consuls were quarrelling and taking
up arms. A battle was fought, in which Octavius[133] got the victory
and ejected Cinna, who was attempting to govern by violent means, and
he put in Cinna's place as consul Cornelius Merula; but Cinna
collected troops in Italy and made war against Octavius. On hearing
this, Marius determined to set sail immediately, which he did with
some Moorish cavalry that he took from Africa, and some few Italians
who had fled there, but the number of both together did not exceed a
thousand. Coming to shore at Telamo[134] in Tyrrhenia, and landing
there, Marius proclaimed freedom to the slaves; and as the freemen who
were employed in agriculture there, and in pasturing cattle, flocked
to the sea, attracted by his fame, Marius persuaded the most vigorous
of them to join him, and in a few days he had collected a considerable
force and manned forty ships. Knowing that Octavius was an honourable
man and wished to direct the administration in the justest way, but
that Cinna was disliked by Sulla and opposed to the existing
constitution, he determined to join him with his force. Accordingly he
sent to Cinna and proffered to obey him as consul in everything. Cinna
accepted the proposal, and naming Marius proconsul, sent him fasces
and the other insigna of the office. Marius, however, observing that
such things were not suited to his fortunes, clad in a mean dress,
with his hair uncut from the day that he had been an exile, and now
above seventy years of age, advanced with slow steps, wishing to make
himself an object of compassion; but there was mingled with his abject
mien more than his usual terrific expression of countenance, and
through his downcast looks he showed that his passion, so far from
being humbled, was infuriated by his reverses of fortune.

XLII. As soon as he had embraced Cinna and greeted the soldiers,
Marius commenced active operations and gave a great turn to affairs.
First of all, by attacking the corn-vessels[135] with his ships and
plundering the merchants, he made himself master of the supplies. He
next sailed to the maritime cities, which he took; and, finally, Ostia
being treacherously surrendered to him, he made plunder of the
property that he found there and put to death many of the people, and
by blocking up the river he completely cut off his enemies from all
supplies by sea. He now moved on with his army towards Rome and
occupied the Janiculus. Octavius damaged his own cause, not so much
from want of skill as through his scrupulous observance of the law, to
which he unwisely sacrificed the public interests; for though many
persons advised him to invite the slaves to join him by promising
their freedom, he refused to make them members of the State from which
he was endeavouring to exclude Marius in obedience to the law. On the
arrival at Rome of Metellus,[136] the son of Metellus who had
commanded in Libya, and had been banished from the city through the
intrigues of Marius, the soldiers deserted Octavius and came to
Metellus, entreating him to take the command and save the city; they
said, if they had an experienced and active commander, they would
fight well and get the victory. But Metellus expressed great
dissatisfaction at their conduct, and bade them go to the consul, upon
which they passed over to the enemy. Metellus also in despair left the
city. But Octavius was persuaded by Chaldæans[137] and certain
diviners and interpreters of the Sibylline books to stay in Rome by
the assurance that all would turn out well. Octavius, who in all other
matters had as solid a judgment as any Roman, and most carefully
maintained the consular dignity free from all undue influence
according to the usage of his country and the laws, as if they were
unchangeable rules, nevertheless showed great weakness in keeping
company with impostors and diviners, rather than with men versed in
political and military matters. Now Octavius was dragged down from the
Rostra before Marius entered the city, by some persons who where sent
forward, and murdered; and it is said that a Chaldæan writing was
found in his bosom after he was killed. It seemed to be a very
inexplicable circumstance, that of two illustrious commanders, Marius
owed his success to not disregarding divination, and Octavius thereby
lost his life.

XLIII. Matters being in this state, the Senate met and sent a
deputation to Cinna and Marius to invite them into the city and to
entreat them to spare the citizens. Cinna, as consul, sitting on his
chair of office, gave audience to the commissioners and returned a
kind answer: Marius stood by the consul's chair without speaking a
word, but indicating by the unchanging heaviness of his brow and his
gloomy look that he intended to fill Rome with slaughter. After the
audience was over, they marched to the city. Cinna entered accompanied
by his guards, but Marius halting at the gates angrily affected to
have some scruples about entering. He said he was an exile and was
excluded from his country by a law, and if anybody wanted to have him
in the city, they must go to the vote again and undo the vote by which
he was banished, just as if he were a man who respected the laws and
were returning from exile to a free state. Accordingly he summoned the
people to the Forum, but before three or four of the tribes had voted,
throwing off the mask and setting aside all the talk about being
legally recalled, he entered with some guards selected from the slaves
who had flocked to him, and who were called Bardiæi. These fellows
killed many persons by his express orders and many on the mere signal
of his nod; and at last meeting with Ancharius, a senator who had
filled the office of prætor, they struck him down with their daggers
in the presence of Marius, when they saw that Marius did not salute
him. After this whenever he did not salute a man or return his salute,
this was a signal for them to massacre him forthwith in the streets,
in consequence of which even the friends of Marius were filled with
consternation and horror when they approached him. The slaughter was
now great, and Cinna's appetite was dulled and he was satisfied with
blood; but Marius daily went on with his passion at the highest pitch
and thirsting for vengeance, through the whole list of those whom
suspected in any degree. And every road and every city was filled with
the pursuers, hunting out those who attempted to escape and conceal
themselves, and the ties of hospitality and friendship were proved to
be no security in misfortune, for they were very few who did not
betray those who sought refuge with them. This rendered the conduct of
the slaves of Cornutus the more worthy of praise and admiration, for
they concealed their master at home, and hanging up by the neck the
dead body of some obscure person, and putting a gold ring on his
finger, they showed him to the guards of Marius, and then wrapping up
the body as if it were their master's, they interred it. The device
went unsuspected, and Cornutus being thus secreted by his slaves, made
his escape to Gaul.

XLIV. The orator Marcus Antonius[138] found a faithful friend, but
still he did not escape. This man, though poor, and of the lower
class, received in his house one of the most illustrious of the
Romans, and wishing to entertain him as well as he could, he sent a
slave to one of the neighbouring wine-shops to get some wine. As the
slave was more curious than usual in tasting it, and told the man to
give him some better wine, the merchant asked what could he the reason
that he did not buy the new wine, as usual, and the ordinary wine, but
wanted some of good quality and high price. The slave replied in his
simplicity, as he was speaking to an old acquaintance, that his master
was entertaining Marcus Antonius, who was concealed at his house. The
wine-dealer, a faithless and unprincipled wretch, as soon as the slave
left him, hurried off to Marius, who was at supper, and having gained
admission, told him that he would betray Marcus Antonius to him. On
hearing this, Marius is said to have uttered a loud shout and to have
clapped his hands with delight; and he was near getting up and going
to the place himself, but his friends stopped him, and he despatched
Annius with some soldiers, with orders to bring him the head of
Antonius immediately. On reaching the house, Annius waited at the
door, and the soldiers mounting the stairs entered the room, but on
seeing Antonius, every man began to urge some of his companions and
push him forward to do the deed instead of himself. And so powerful
were the charm and persuasion of his eloquence, when Antonius began to
speak and pray for his life, that not a man of them could venture to
lay hands on him or look him in the face, but they all bent their
heads down and shed tears. As this caused some delay, Annius went
upstairs, where he saw Antonius speaking and the soldiers awed and
completely softened by his eloquence; on which he abused them, and
running up to Antonius, cut off his head with his own hand. The
friends of Catulus Lutatius, who had been joint consul with Marius and
with him had triumphed over the Cimbri, interceded for him with
Marius, and begged for his life; but the only answer they got was, "He
must die!" and accordingly Catulus shut himself up in a room, and
lighting a quantity of charcoal, suffocated himself. Headless trunks
thrown into the streets and trampled underfoot excited no feeling of
compassion, but only a universal shudder and alarm. But the people
were most provoked by the licence of the Bardiæi, who murdered fathers
of families in their houses, defiled their children, and violated
their wives; and they went on plundering and committing violence, till
Cinna and Sertorius combining, attacked them when they were asleep in
the camp, and transfixed them with spears.

XLV. In the meantime, as if the wind was beginning to turn, reports
reached Rome from all quarters that Sulla had finished the war with
Mithridates, and recovered the provinces, and was sailing against the
city with a large force. This intelligence caused a brief cessation
and pause to unspeakable calamities, for Marius and his faction were
in expectation of the immediate arrival of their enemies. Now being
elected consul[139] for the seventh time, on the very Calends of
January, which is the beginning of the year, Marius caused one Sextus
Lucinus[140] to be thrown down the Tarpeian rock, which appeared to be
a presage of the great misfortunes that were again to befal the
partisans of Marius and the State. But Marius was now worn out with
labour, and, as it were, drowned with cares, and cowed in his spirit;
and the experience of past dangers and toil made him tremble at the
thoughts of a new war, and fresh struggles and alarms, and he could
not sustain himself when he reflected that now he would have to
hazard a contest, not with Octavius or Merula at the head of a
tumultuous crowd and seditious rabble, but that Sulla was
advancing--Sulla, who had once driven him from Rome, and had now
confined Mithridates within the limits of his kingdom of Pontus. With
his mind crushed by such reflections, and placing before his eyes his
long wanderings and escapes and dangers in his flight by sea and by
land, he fell into a state of deep despair, and was troubled with
nightly alarms and terrific dreams in which he thought he heard a
voice continually calling out,

"Dreadful is the lion's lair
    Though he is no longer there."

As he greatly dreaded wakeful nights, he gave himself up to drinking
and intoxication at unseasonable hours and to a degree unsuited to his
age, in order to procure sleep, as if he could thus elude his cares.
At last when a man arrived with news from the sea, fresh terrors
seized him, partly from fear of the future and partly from feeling the
burden and the weariness of the present state of affairs; and while he
was in this condition, a slight disturbance sufficed to bring on a
kind of pleurisy, as the philosopher Poseidonius[141] relates, who
also says that he had an interview and talked with him on the subject
of his embassy, while Marius was sick. But one Caius Piso,[142] an
historian, says that Marius, while walking about with some friends
after supper, fell to talking of the incidents of his life, beginning
with his boyhood, and after enumerating his many vicissitudes of
fortune, he said that no man of sense ought to trust fortune after
such reverses; upon which he took leave of his friends, and keeping
his bed for seven successive days, thus died. Some say that his
ambitious character was most completely disclosed during his illness
by his falling into the extravagant delusion that he was conducting
the war against Mithridates, and he would then put his body into all
kinds of attitudes and movements, as he used to do in battle, and
accompany them with loud shouts and frequent cheers. So strong and
unconquerable a desire to be engaged in that war had his ambitious and
jealous character instilled into him; and therefore, though he had
lived to be seventy years of age, and was the first Roman who had been
seven times consul and had made himself a family, and wealth enough
for several kings, he still bewailed his fortune, and complained of
dying before he had attained the fulness and completion of his
desires.

XLVI. Now Plato, being at the point of death, felicitated himself on
his dæmon[143] and his fortune, first that he was born a human being,
then that he was a Greek, and neither a barbarian nor an irrational
animal; and besides all this, that his birth had fallen on the time
when Socrates lived. And indeed it is said that Antipater[144] of
Tarsus, in like manner, just before his death, when recapitulating the
happiness that he had enjoyed, did not forget his prosperous voyage
from Rome to Athens, inasmuch as he considered every gift of
favourable fortune as a thing to be thankful for, and preserved it to
the last in his memory, which is to man the best storehouse of good
things. But those who have no memory and no sense, let the things that
happen ooze away imperceptibly in the course of time; and
consequently, as they hold nothing and keep nothing, being always
empty of all goodness, but full of expectation, they look to the
future and throw away the present. And yet fortune may hinder the
future, but the present cannot be taken from a man; nevertheless, such
men reject that which fortune now gives, as something foreign, and
dream of that which is uncertain: and it is natural that they should;
for before reason and education have enabled them to put a foundation
and basement under external goods, they get and they heap them
together, and are never able to fill the insatiate appetite of their
soul. Now Marius[145] died, having held for seventeen days his seventh
consulship. And immediately there were great rejoicings in Rome, and
good hope that there was a release from a cruel tyranny; but in a few
days men found that they had exchanged an old master for a young one
who was in the fulness of his vigour; such cruelty and severity did
the son of Marius exhibit in putting to death the noblest and best
citizens. He gained the reputation of a man of courage, and one who
loved danger in his wars against his enemies, and was named a son of
Mars: but his acts speedily showed his real character, and he received
instead the name of a son of Venus. Finally, being shut up in Præneste
by Sulla, and having in vain tried all ways of saving his life, he
killed himself when he saw that the city was captured and all escape
was hopeless.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 51: When Plutarch wrote, the system of naming persons among
the Romans had undergone some changes, or at least the old fashion was
not strictly observed, and this will explain his remark at the end of
the chapter. A Roman had usually three names, as Caius Julius Cæsar.
The first name, which was called the Prænomen, denoted the individual:
the most common names of this class were Quintus, Caius, Marcus,
Lucius, and so on. The second name denoted the gens, and was called
the Gentile name, as Cornelius, Julius, Licinius, Mucius, Sempronius,
and so on. The same gens often contained different families; thus
there were Licinii Crassi, Licinii Luculli, and so on. This third name
was called the Cognomen, and was given to the founder of the family or
to some member of the gens in respect of some personal peculiarity or
other accidental circumstance, as Scipio, Cicero, Crassus, Lucullus,
Gracchus. A fourth name, or Agnomen, was sometimes added, as in the
case of Publius Cornelius Scipio, the elder, who received the name of
Africanus from his conquest of Africa. This agnomen might be the third
name, when there was no cognomen, as in the case of Lucius Mummius,
who received the name of Achaicus because he overthrew the Achæan
League in that war, of which the concluding event was the destruction
of Corinth, which belonged to the League. Poseidonius means that the
prænomen (Quintus, Marcus, &c.) was more used in speaking of or to an
individual; but in Plutarch's time the cognomen or agnomen was most
used. We speak of the three Cæsars, Vespasianus and his two sons Titus
and Domitianus, yet the gentile name of all of them was Flavius. The
complete names of the first two were Titus Flavius Vespasianus, and of
the third Titus Flavius Domitianus.

Women had usually one name, derived from their gens; thus all the
women of the Cornelii, Julii, Licinii, were called Cornelia, Julia,
Licinia; and if there were several daughters in a family, they were
distinguished by the names First, Second, and so on. If there were two
daughters only, they were called respectively Major and Minor. Sulla
called one of his daughters Fausta. (See Cicero, _Ad Div._ viii. 7,
Paula Valeria; and the note of P. Manutius.)]

[Footnote 52: Some understand the word ([Greek: eikon] εἰκών) to mean
a bust here. The word is used in both senses, and also to signify a
picture. When the statue of Tiberius Gracchus the father is spoken of
(Caius Gracchus, c. 10), Plutarch uses a different word ([Greek:
andrias] ὰνδρίας). Plutarch speaks of Ravenna as in Gaul, which he
calls Galatia; but though Ravenna was within the limits of Cisalpine
Gaul, the name of Italy had been extended to the whole Peninsula south
of the Alps about B.C. 44.]

[Footnote 53: Literally "shows:" they might be plays or they might be
other amusements.]

[Footnote 54: This is probably a corrupt name. The territory of
Arpinum, now Arpino, was in the Volscian mountains. Arpinum was also
the birth-place of Cicero. Juvenal in his rhetorical fashion (_Sat_.
viii. 245) represents the young Marius as earning his bread by working
at the plough as a servant and afterwards entering the army as a
common soldier.]

[Footnote 55: Lucius Aurelius Cotta and Lucius Cæcilius Metellus were
consuls B.C. 119, in which year Marius was tribune. The law which
Marius proposed had for its object to make the Pontes narrower. The
Pontes were the passages through which the voters went into the Septa
or inclosures where they voted. After passing through the pontes they
received the voting tablets at the entrance of the septa. The object
of the law of Marius was to diminish the crowd and pressure by letting
fewer persons come in at a time. Cicero speaks of this law of Marius
(_De Legibus_, iii. 17). As the law had reference to elections and its
object was among other things to prevent bribery, Plutarch's remark is
unintelligible: the text is corrupt, or he has made a mistake.]

[Footnote 56: The higher magistrates of Rome, the curule ædiles,
prætors, consuls, censors, and dictator had a chair of office called a
Sella Curulis, or Curule seat, which Plutarch correctly describes as a
chair with curved feet (See the cut in Smith's _Dictionary of
Antiquities_, "Sella Curulis"). The name Curule is derived from
Currus, a chariot, as the old writers say, and as is proved by the
expression Curulis Triumphus, a Curule Triumph, which is opposed to an
Ovatio, in which the triumphing general went on foot in the
procession.

The Plebeian Ædiles were first elected B.C. 494, at the same time as
the Plebeian tribunes. They had various functions, such as the general
superintendence of buildings, the supply of water, the care of the
streets and pavements, and other like matters. Their duties mainly
belonged to the department of police, under which was included the
superintendence of the markets, and of buying and selling. The
Plebeian Ædiles were originally two in number.

[Footnote 59: His alleged intemperance consisted in not being able to
endure thirst on such an occasion. His real offence was his conduct
which made him suspected of acting as an agent of Marius in the
election. It was one of the duties of the Censors, when revising the
lists of Equites and Senators, to erase the names of those whom they
considered unworthy of the rank, and this without giving any reason
for it.]

[Footnote 60: The words Patron and Client are now used by us, but,
like many other Roman terms, not in the original or proper sense.
Dominus and Servus, Master and Slave, were terms placed in opposition
to one another, like Patron and Client, Patronus and Cliens. A master
who manumitted his slave became his Patronus, a kind of father (for
Patronus is derived from Pater, father): the slave was called the
Patron's Libertus, freedman; and all Liberti were included in the
class Libertini. Libertinus is another example of a word which we use
(libertine), though not in the Roman sense. But the old Roman relation
of Patron and Client was not this. Originally the heads of
distinguished families had a number of retainers or followers who were
called their Clients, a word which perhaps originally meant those who
were bound to hear and to obey a common head. It was a tradition that
when Atta Claudius, the head of the great Claudian Gens, who were
Sabines, was admitted among the Roman Patricians, he brought with him
a large body of clients to whom land was given north of the Anio, now
the Teverone. (Livius, 2, c. 16; Suetonius, _Tiberius_, c. 1.) The
precise relation of the early clients to their leaders is one of the
most difficult questions in Roman History, and much too extensive to
be discussed here. It was the Patron's duty to protect his clients and
to give them his aid and advice in all matters that required it: the
clients owed to the Patron respect and obedience and many duties which
are tolerably well ascertained. Long after the strictness of the old
relation had been relaxed, the name continued and some of the duties,
as we see in this sentence of Marius, where the Patron claimed to be
exempted from giving evidence against his client. In the last periods
of the Republic and under the Empire, Patron was sometimes simply used
as Protector, adviser, defender, and Client to express one who looked
up to another as his friend and adviser, particularly in all matters
where his legal rights were concerned. Great men under the later
Republic sometimes became the Patrons of particular states or cities,
and looked after their interests at Rome. We have adopted the word
Client in the sense of one who goes to an attorney or solicitor for
his legal advice, but with us the client pays for the advice, and the
attorney is not called his patron. A modern patron is one who
patronises, protects, gives his countenance to an individual, or to
some association of individuals, but frequently he merely gives his
countenance or his name, that being as much as can be asked from him
or as much as he will give.

The Clients must be distinguished from the Plebs in the early history
of Rome, though there can be no doubt that part of the Plebeian body
was gradually formed out of clients.]

[Footnote 61: Robbery and piracy were in like manner reckoned
honourable occupations by the old Greeks (Thucydides, i. 5). These old
robbers made no distinction between robbery and war: plunder was their
object, and labour they hated. So says Herodotus (v. 6). A Thracian
considered it a disgrace to till the ground; to live by plunder was
the mark of a gentleman. When people can live by plunder, there must
be somebody worth plundering. One object of modern civilisation is to
protect him who labours from the aggression of him who does not.]

[Footnote 62: This fact renders it doubtful if Marius was of such mean
birth as it is said. He married Julia, the sister of C. Julius Cæsar.
This Cæsar was the father of C. Julius Cæsar, the dictator, who was
consequently the nephew of Caius Marius.]

[Footnote 63: See _Penny Cyclopædia_, "Veins, Diseases of." Cicero
(_Tusculan. Quæst._ 2. c. 22) alludes to this story of the surgical
operation. He uses the word Varices.]

[Footnote 64: Q. Cæcilius Metellus was consul B.C. 109 with M. Junius
Silanus. He obtained the Agnomen of Numidicus for his services in the
Jugurthine war.]

[Footnote 65: Legatus is a participle from the verb Lego, which
signifies to assign anything to a person to do; hence legatus is one
to whom something is delegated. The Roman word Legatus had various
senses. Here the word legatus, which is the word that Plutarch
intends, is a superior officer who holds command under a Consul,
Prætor, Proconsul, Proprætor.]

[Footnote 66: The story of Turpillius is told by Sallustius
(_Jugurthine War_, 66), who speaks of his execution, but says nothing
of his innocence being afterwards established. The Romans had in their
armies a body of engineers called Fabri, and the director of the body
was called Præfectus Fabrorum. Vaga, which Sallustius calls Vacoa, was
one of the chief towns in Numidia.]

[Footnote 67: Sallustius, who tells the same story pretty nearly in
the same way (_Jugurth. War_, c. 64), says that the son of Metellus
was about twenty. The insult was not one to be forgiven by a man like
Marius, to be told that it would be soon enough for him to be consul
three-and-twenty years hence. This son is Q. Cæcilius Metellus Pius
who afterwards fought against Sertorius in Spain.]

[Footnote 68: The Latin word which Plutarch has translated is
Imagines. These Imagines were busts of wax, marble, or metal, which
the Romans of family placed in the entrance of their houses. They
corresponded to a set of family portraits, but they were the portraits
of men who had enjoyed the high offices of the State. These Imagines
were carried in procession at funerals. Polybius (vi. 53) has a
discourse on this subject, which is worth reading. Marius, who was a
Novus Homo, a new man, had no family busts to show.]

[Footnote 69: Lucius Calpurnius Bestia was consul B.C. 111, and
Spurius Postumius Albinus B.C. 110. They successively conducted the
war against Jugurtha without success. Sallustius (_Jugurth. War_, c.
85) has put a long speech in the mouth of Marius on this occasion,
which Plutarch appears to have used.]

[Footnote 70: Though much has been said on the subject, there is
nothing worth adding to what Plutarch tells. He gives the various
opinions that he had collected.]

[Footnote 76: The passage in Homer is in the 11th Book, v. 14, &c.
This Book is entitled Necyia [Greek: nekyia] νέκυια, which is the word
that Plutarch uses; it literally signifies an offering or sacrifice by
which the shades of the dead are called up from the lower world to
answer questions that are put to them.]

[Footnote 77: In B.C. 113 the Romans first heard of the approach of
the Cimbri and Teutones. Cn. Papirius Carbo, one of the consuls of
this year, was defeated by them in Illyricum (part of Stiria), but
they did not cross the Alps. In B.C. 109 the consul M. Junius Silanus
was defeated by the Cimbri, who demanded of the Roman Senate lands to
settle in: the demand was refused. In B.C. 107 the consul L. Cassius
Longinus fell in battle against the Galli Tigurini, who inhabited a
part of Switzerland, and his army was sent under the yoke. This was
while his colleague Marius was carrying on the campaign against
Jugurtha in Africa. In B.C. 105 Cn. Manlius Maximus, the consul, and
Q. Servilius Cæpio, proconsul, who had been consul in B.C. 106, were
defeated by the Cimbri with immense slaughter, and lost both their
camps. The name of Manlius is written Mallius in the Fasti Consulares,
ed. Baiter.]

[Footnote 78: Scipio Africanus the younger was elected consul B.C. 147
when he was thirty-seven years of age, the law as to age being for
that occasion not enforced. There was an old Plebiscitum (law passed
in the Comitia Tributa) which enacted that no man should hold the same
magistracy without an interval of ten full years. (Livius. 7, c. 42;
10, c. 13). The first instance of the law being suspended was in the
case of Q. Fabius Maximus. One of Sulla's laws re-enacted or confirmed
the old law.]

[Footnote 79: This canal of Marius is mentioned by Strabo (p. 183) and
other ancient writers. The eastern branch of the Rhone runs from
Arelate (Arles) to the sea, and the canal of Marius probably commenced
in this branch about twenty Roman miles below Arles (which did not
then exist), and entered the sea between the mouth of this branch and
Maritima, now Martigues. The length of the canal of Marius might be
about twelve Roman miles. Marseilles is east of Martigues. (D'Anville.
_Notice de la Gaule Ancienne_.)]

[Footnote 80: The movements of the barbarians are not clearly stated.
It appears from what follows that the Cimbri entered Italy on the
north-east over the Noric Alps, for their march brought them to the
banks of the Adige. Florus says that they came by the defiles of
Tridentum (Trento). The Teutones, if they marched through the Ligurian
country along the sea to meet Marius, who was near Marseilles, must
have come along the Riviera of Genoa.]

[Footnote 81: Plutarch calls her a Syrian. Martha may have been a
Syrian name, as well as a Jewish name. Syrians and Jews flocked to
Rome in great numbers under the later Republic and the Empire, and got
their living in various ways not always reputable. The Jews at Rome
used to cause disturbances in the popular assemblies in Cicero's time.
(Cic. _Pro Flacco_, c. 28.) Jews and Syrians are often mentioned
together by the Roman writers. The Jews at Rome were greatly troubled
at the assassination of the Dictator Cæsar, and they crowded round the
place where the body was burnt for nights in succession. Cæsar had
rather favoured the nation for their services in the Alexandrine War.
(Suetonius, _Cæsar_, c. 84, and Casaubon's note.)]

[Footnote 82: He wrote on Natural History; among other things, a
History of Birds, from which this story is probably taken. There is
evidently an error in the text [Greek: êspazonto tous stratiotas]
ἠσπάζοντο τοὺς στρατιοτάς. I have adopted Reiske's emendation.]

[Footnote 97: Plutarch pays no attention to the movements of an army,
and his battles are confused. He had perhaps no great turn for
studying military movements, and their minute details did not come
within his plans.]

[Footnote 98: Plutarch alludes to Sulla's memoirs in twenty-two books,
which, he frequently refers to. Catulus wrote a history of the war and
of his consulship, which Cicero (_Brutus_, c. 35) compares as to style
with Xenophon. It appears from Plutarch's remark that he had not seen
the work of Catulus.]

[Footnote 99: [Greek: Dibolia] Διβολία is the reading that I have
followed. I have given the meaning here and in the first part of the
next chapter as well as I can.]

[Footnote 100: This was the Roman expression for dedicating something
to a sacred purpose. After the victory Catulus consecrated a temple at
Rome "To the Fortune of this Day."]

[Footnote 101: Sextilis, the sixth month of the Roman year when the
year began in March, was called Augustus in honour of Augustus Cæsar,
as Quintilis or the fifth month was called Julius in honour of the
Dictator Cæsar.]

[Footnote 102: Reiske would make the ambassadors to be from Panormus
(Palermo) in Sicily.]

[Footnote 103: Marius was now Consul. Catulus was only Proconsul. He
was consul the year before.]

[Footnote 104: The allusion is to Romulus, and M. Furius Camillus, who
saved Rome in the Gallic invasion B.C. 300.]

[Footnote 105: L. Appuleius Saturninus was tribune in the year B.C.
100, in the sixth consulship of Marius. He was put to death in the
same year (c. 30), though his death is not mentioned there by
Plutarch.

C. Servilius Glaucia was prætor in this year. He lost his life at the
same time with Saturninus. This Servilius was a great favourite with
the people. He proposed and carried a law De Pecuniis Repetundis, or
on mal-administration in a public office, some fragments of which are
preserved on a bronze tablet, and have been commented on by Klenze,
Berlin, 1825, 4to.]

[Footnote 106: Rutilius Rufus was consul B.C. 105. He was accused of
malversation in his proconsulship of Asia, B.C. 99, convicted by the
judices, who at that time were taken from the Equites, and retired to
Smyrna, where he spent the rest of his days. He wrote his own Memoirs
in Latin, and a history of Rome in Greek. He was an honest man,
according to all testimony, and innocent of the offence for which he
was convicted. (Compare Tacitus, _Agricola_, 1; and C. Gracchus,
notes, c. 5.)]

[Footnote 107: The consulships of M. Valerius Corvus were comprised
between B.C. 348 and B.C. 299 (See Livius, 8, c. 26.)]

[Footnote 108: He was murdered at the instigation of Saturninus and
Glaucia as he was leaving the place of assembly. He fled into an inn
or tavern to escape, but he was followed by the rabble and killed.
(Appian, _Civil Wars_, i. 28.)]

[Footnote 109: The law related to the lands which the Cimbri had taken
from the Gauls in Cisalpine Gaul, and which the Romans now claimed as
theirs because they had taken them from the Cimbri. Appian (_Civil
Wars_, i. 29, &c.) gives the history of the events in this chapter.]

[Footnote 110: Appian's account is clearer than Plutarch's. He says
that Metellus withdrew before the passing; of the enactment by which
he was banished. This was the usual formula by which a person was put
under a ban, and it was called the Interdiction of "fire and water,"
to which sometimes "house" is added, as in this case. The complete
expression was probably fire, water, and house. Cicero had the same
penalty imposed on him, but he withdrew from Rome, like Metellus,
before the enactment was carried. There is no extant Life of Metellus
Numidicus by Plutarch.]

[Footnote 111: The story of the death of Saturninus and Glaucia is
told by Appian (_Civil Wars_, i. 32). These men committed another
murder before they were taken off. They set men upon Memmius, who was
the competitor of Glaucia for the consulship, and Memmius was killed
with clubs in the open day while the voting was going on. The Senate
made a decree that Marius should put down these disturbers, but he
acted unwillingly and slowly. The supply of water, according to
Appian, was cut off by others, before Marius began to move. These
turbulent times are spoken of by Cicero in his oration for C.
Rabirius, c. 11. Marius put the men who surrendered into the
Senate-house, but the people pulled the tiles off the roof and pelted
the prisoners with the tiles till they died.]

[Footnote 112: The return of Metellus was mainly due to the exertions
of his son, who thence obtained the name of Pius. He was restored B.C.
99 by an enactment (lex) which was necessary in order to do away with
the effect of the Interdict. Cicero was restored in like manner. One
Publius Furius, a tribune, the son of a man who had once been a slave,
successfully opposed the return of Metellus during his year of office.
In the next year Furius was out of office, and Caius Canuleius, a
tribune, prosecuted him for his conduct before the people (populi
judicium), who had not patience enough to listen to his defence; they
tore him in pieces in the Forum. Metellus was detained a whole day at
the gates of Rome with receiving the congratulations of his friends on
his return. (Appian, _Civil Wars_, i. 33.)]

[Footnote 113: See the Life of Sulla.]

[Footnote 114: The Social, called also the Marsic, war, from the
warlike nation of the Marsi who were active in it, commenced B.C. 91
and was not completely ended till B.C. 88. The immediate cause of the
Social war, or the war of the Italian Allies (Socii) of the Romans,
was the rejection of a measure proposed by the tribune M. Livius
Drusus, which was to give to the Italian allies the rights of Roman
citizens. The Allies were subject States of Rome, which supplied the
Romans with men and money for their wars and contributed to their
victories. They claimed to have the political rights of Romans as a
compensation for their burdens; and they succeeded in the end. The war
was at first unfavourable to the Romans. In the consulship of L.
Julius Cæsar, B.C. 90, a Lex Julia was proposed which gave the Roman
citizenship to all the Italians who had continued faithful to Rome, if
they chose to accept it. A Lex Plautia Papiria of the following year
extended the Lex Julia and gave the Roman citizenship to all the
allies except the Samnites and Lucanians. Sulla finished the war. (See
Life of Sulla.)]

[Footnote 115: The MSS. of Plutarch vary in this name. His true name
was Pompædius Silo: he was the leader of the Marsi. He fell in battle
against Metellus Pius.]

[Footnote 116: Publius Sulpicius Rufus was tribune B.C. 88 in the
first consulship of Sulla. Cicero had heard many of the speeches of
Sulpicius. "He was," says Cicero, "of all the orators that ever I
heard, the most dignified, and if one may use the expression, the most
tragic: his voice was powerful, sweet, and clear; his gesture and
every movement graceful; and yet he seemed as if he were trained for
the Forum and not for the stage; his language was rapid and flowery,
and yet not redundant or diffuse." (Brutus, c. 55.) Yet this great
orator was no writer, and Cicero had heard him say that he was not
accustomed to write and could not write. The fact of his inability to
write is sufficiently explained by the fact that he did not try.
Cicero has made Sulpicius one of the speakers in his Book on the
Orator, where (iii. 3) he admits that he was a rash man. (See _Penny
Cyclopædia_, "P. Sulpicius Rufus," by the author of this note; and as
to his end, see Sulla, c. 10.)]

[Footnote 117: Baiæ on the north side of the Bay of Naples, and near
Puteoli (Pozzuoli), was a favourite residence of the wealthy Romans,
who came for pleasure and to use the warm baths. The promontory of
Misenum is near Baiæ.]

[Footnote 118: Plutarch means drachmæ. (See Tiberius Gracchus, c. 2.)]

[Footnote 119: The history of this affair is given somewhat more
clearly by Appian (_Civil Wars_, i. 55). Marius gave the Italians who
had lately obtained the franchise, hopes that they would be
distributed among the other tribes, and thus they would have a
preponderance, for they were more numerous than the old citizens.
Sulpicius accordingly proposed a law to this effect, which was
followed by a great disturbance, upon which the consuls Pompeius and
Sulla proclaimed a Justitium such as was usual on festivals. A
Justitium signifies a stopping of all legal proceedings: during a
Justitium nothing could be done; and the consuls adopted this measure
to prevent the proposed law of Sulpicius from being carried. Appian
says that Sulpicius carried this law, and the tribes in which the new
citizens now had the majority appointed Marius to the command in the
war against Mithridates. But Sulla and Pompeius afterwards got all the
laws of Sulpicius repealed on the ground of being earned by
unconstitutional means. (Appian, _Civil Wars_, i. 59).]

[Footnote 120: This act is sufficient to stamp Marius with infamy; and
it is not the only time that he did it. Octavius, an honest man,
refused to arm the slave against his master. (Marius, c. 42). The last
British governor of Virginia closed his inglorious career by the same
unsuccessful act of cowardice. (November, 1775). "In November Lord
Dunmore proclaimed martial law in the colony, and executed his
long-threatened plan of giving freedom to all slaves who could bear
arms and would flock to his standard. But these measures, though
partially annoying, had the effect of irritating and rousing the
people rather than breaking their spirit." (Tucker's _Life of
Jefferson_, vol. i. p. 78). Before the middle of the next year Dunmore
made his escape from Virginia, after setting fire to the town of
Norfolk.]

[Footnote 127: Ænaria, now Ischia, is forty miles south of the mouth
of the Liris.]

[Footnote 128: Marius and his adherents had been declared enemies to
the State; and in the declaration it was not forgotten that Marius had
attempted to excite the slaves to rebellion. The head of Sulpicius was
already stuck up in the Forum (Appian, _Civil Wars_, i. 60; Velleius,
ii. 19).]

[Footnote 129: A divorce at Rome was effected by the husband or wife
giving a written notice. In the time of Cicero, at least, either party
might effect the divorce. If the divorce was owing to the adultery of
the wife, the husband was entitled to retain a part of the
marriage-portion; a sixth, according to Ulpian (_Frag._ vi.). The
marriage-portion or Dos (which Plutarch translates by the Greek word
[Greek: phernê] φέρνη) was that property which on the occasion of a
woman's marriage was transferred to the husband by the woman or by
another, for the purpose of enabling the husband to bear the
additional burden of a wife and family. All the woman's property which
did not become dos, remained her own, except in one of the forms of
marriage (conventio in manum), when, pursuant to the nature of the
union by which the wife came into her husband's power and assumed
towards him the relation of a daughter, all her property became her
husband's; as is distinctly asserted by Cicero (_Topica_, 4; compare
Ulpian, _Frag_. xix. 18). As the dos was given to the husband for a
particular purpose, it was consistent that it should be returned when
the marriage was dissolved. The means of recovering the dos was by
action. The liability to restore the dos would be one check on the
husband lightly separating from his wife. When Cicero's brother
Quintus divorced his wife Pomponia, he had a good deal of trouble in
finding means to return her portion. (Cicero, _Ad Attic._ xiv. 13).
The law of dos comprised a great number of rules, and is a difficult
subject. Rein (Das _Römische Privatrecht_, p. 204) has given a sketch
of the Roman Law of Divorce that is useful to scholars; and he has in
another place (p. 193, &c.) treated of the Law of Dos. It is difficult
to avoid, error in stating anything briefly on the subject of Divorce
and Dos.]

[Footnote 130: Plutarch does not say what the copper coins were; nor
is it important. The penalty was merely nominal, but it was
accompanied by what the Romans called Infamia. Fannia showed on this
occasion that she was a better woman than Marius took her to be.
Tinnius is perhaps not a Roman name. There are many errors in proper
names in Plutarch's text. Perhaps the true reading is Titinius. (See
the note of Sintenis).]

[Footnote 131: All or nearly all of the Italian cities had a municipal
constitution. The chief magistrates were generally two, and called
Duumviri. The Council was called the Decuriones or Senate.]

[Footnote 132: This is the island of Gerba in the regency of Tunis,
close to the shore and to the town of Gabs or Cabes. It is now a large
and populous island inhabited by an industrious manufacturing
population. It is about 200 miles south of Tunis, which is near the
site of Carthage. Cercina is a group of smaller islands above 50 miles
north of Meninx, now called the Karkenna islands. These distances show
that Marius must have been rambling about for some time this coast.
(_Penny Cyclopædia_, art. "Tunis.")]

[Footnote 133: Cn. Octavius Nepos and L. Cornelius Cinna were consuls
B.C. 87. Cinna had sworn to maintain the interests of the Senate
(Sulla, c. 10), but when Sulla had left Italy for the Mithridatic war,
Cinna declared himself in favour of the new citizens, and attempted to
carry the measure for incorporating them with the old tribes. It is
said that he received a considerable sum of money for undertaking
this. The parties of Cinna and Octavius armed for the contest which
was expected to take place when this measure was proposed. Octavius
drove his opponents out of the Forum with great slaughter, and Cinna
left the city. He was joined by great numbers of the new citizens and
then formed an army. The Senate passed a decree that Cinna was neither
consul nor a citizen, inasmuch as he had deserted the city, and
offered freedom to the slaves if they would join him. L. Cornelius
Merula, who was elected consul in place of Cinna, was flamen dialis,
or Priest of Jupiter. He put himself to death by opening his veins,
after Marius and Cinna entered Rome. (Appian, _Civil Wars_, i. 74).]

[Footnote 134: Now Talamone, on the coast of Tuscany near Orbitello.]

[Footnote 135: Rome had long before this derived supplies of corn from
Sicily and other parts out of Italy. Perhaps this may prove that the
cultivation in the Campagna of Rome and the countries south of
Terracina had not improved with the increase of Rome. But other
countries are better suited for grain than the low lands of this side
of Italy, and so far as concerns the cost of transport, grain might be
brought from Sardinia and Sicily as cheaply as from many parts of
Italy, and cheaper than from the plains of Apulia, which is a good
corn country.]

[Footnote 136: Metellus Pius was now carrying on the war against the
Samnites, who were still in arms. He came to Rome at the invitation of
the Senate. (Appian, _Civil Wars_, i. 68.)]

[Footnote 137: The Roman writers often mention the Chaldæans. They
were adventurers from Asia who made their living in the great
superstition market of Rome by foretelling future events. Whether they
were really Chaldæans does not appear. The death of Octavius is told
somewhat differently by Appian (_Civil Wars_, i. 71). His head was cut
off and placed on the Rostra, and many other heads also. He was the
first consul whose head was exposed on the Rostra. Other atrocities
are mentioned by Appian, c. 72, &c. It was the fashion in England less
than a hundred years back to place traitors' heads on Temple Bar,
London. "I have been this morning at the Tower, and passed under the
new heads at Temple Bar; where people make a trade of letting
spy-glasses at a halfpenny a look" (Horace Walpole, Letter to George
Montague, Aug. 16, 1746).]

[Footnote 138: Marcus Antonius, sometimes called the Orator, was the
grandfather of Marcus Antonius the Triumvir. His head was fixed on the
Rostra. Cicero, who has left on record a testimony to his great
talents, and deplored his fate (_De Oratore_, iii. 3), had the same
ill-luck from the hands of Antonius the Triumvir. M. Antonius the
orator filled many high posts, and was consul B.C. 99. But his title
to remembrance is his great oratorical skill. Cicero says that
Antonius and his contemporary Lucius Licinius Crassus were the first
Romans who equalled the great orators of Greece. The judicious remarks
of Antonius on the conduct of a cause are preserved by Cicero (_De
Oratore_, ii. 72). Antonius left no writings. (See "Antonius, Marcus,"
in _Biog. Dict._ of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful
Knowledge.)]

[Footnote 139: Marius was elected Consul for the seventh time B.C. 86.
His colleague was Cinna. On the death of Marius, Valerius Flaccus was
elected in his place, and sent to Asia. On the death of Flaccus, Carbo
was elected in his place.]

[Footnote 140: One MS. has Licinius, which is the right name. Licinius
was a Senator. (Livius, _Epit_. lib. 80: Dion, _Frag_. 120.)]

[Footnote 141: The same person who is mentioned above (c. 1). He was
of Rhodes and a Stoic. Poseidonius was one of Cicero's teachers, and
survived Cicero's consulship, as we see from a letter of Cicero (_Ad
Attic_. ii. 1), which also shows that he knew how to flatter his old
pupil's vanity. Cicero (_De Natura Deorum_, ii. 38) speaks of a Sphere
of Poseidonius which represented certain phenomena of the sun's and
moon's motions and those of the five stars (planets). Nothing is known
about this embassy.]

[Footnote 142: It is not known who is meant. (See Krause, _Fragment.
Historicorum Romanorun_, p. 139.)]

[Footnote 144: He was a Stoic and the master of Panætius. His age is
determined approximatively by the facts mentioned in the Life of
Tiberius Gracchus (c. 5). (See "Antipater of Tarsus," in _Biog. Dict._
of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge.)]

[Footnote 145: See Life of Sulla (c. 28-32). Marius was consul with
Cn. Papirius Carbo, B.C. 82. Appian (_Civil Wars_, i. 87) says that
this Marius was the nephew of the distinguished Marius. There seems to
be some confusion about this younger Marius. (See c. 35.)]

LIFE OF LYSANDER

The Athenians accepted these terms, by the advice of Theramenes the
son of Hagnon: and on this occasion it is said that when he was asked
by Kleomenes, one of the younger orators, how he dared to act and
speak against what Themistokles had done, by giving up to the
Lacedæmonians those walls which Themistokles had built in spite of
them, he answered, "My boy, I am doing nothing contrary to
Themistokles; for these same walls he built up to save his countrymen,
and we will throw them down to save them. Indeed, if walls made a city
prosperous, then ought Sparta, which has none, to be the most
miserable of all."

XV. Now Lysander, after taking all the fleet of the Athenians except
twelve ships, and having taken possession of their walls, began to
take measures for the subversion of their political constitution, on
the sixteenth day of the month Munychion, the same day on which they
had defeated the Persians in the sea-fight at Salamis. As they were
greatly grieved at this, and were loth to obey him, he sent word to
the people that the city had broken the terms of its capitulation,
because their walls were standing although the time within which they
ought to have been destroyed had elapsed. He therefore would make an
entirely new decision about their fate, because they had broken the
treaty. Some writers say that he actually consulted the allies about
the advisability of selling the whole population for slaves, in which
debate the Theban Erianthus proposed to destroy the city and make the
site of it a sheep walk. Afterwards, however, when the generals were
drinking together a Phokian sang the first song in the Elektra of
Euripides, which begins with the words--

"Elektra, Agamemnon's child,
    I reach thy habitation wild."

At first the Lacedæmonians paid no attention to complaints brought
against him; but when Pharnabazus, who had been wronged by Lysander's
depredations on his country, sent an embassy to Sparta to demand
justice, the Ephors were much enraged. They put to death Thorax, one
of his friends, whom they found in possession of silver coin, and they
sent a skytale to him bidding him appear before them. I will now
explain what a skytale was. When the Ephors sent out any one as
general or admiral of their forces, they used to prepare two round
sticks of wood of exactly the same length and thickness, corresponding
with one another at the ends. One of these they kept themselves, and
the other they gave to the person sent out. These sticks they call
skytales. Now when they desire to transmit some secret of importance
to him, they wrap a long narrow strip of paper[152] like a strap round
the skytale which is in their possession, leaving no intervals, but
completely covering the stick along its whole length with the paper.
When this has been done they write upon the paper while it is upon the
stick, and after writing they unwind the paper and send it to the
general without the stick. When he receives it, it is entirely
illegible, as the letters have no connection, but he winds it round
the stick in his possession so that the folds correspond to one
another, and then the whole message can be read. The paper is called
skytale as well as the stick, as a thing measured is called by the
name of the measure.

XX. Lysander, when this skytale reached him at the Hellespont, was
much troubled, and as he especially feared the accusations of
Pharnabazus, he hastened to confer with him, with a view to settling
their dispute. When they met, Lysander begged him to write a second
letter to the Spartan government, stating that he had not received any
wrong, and that he had no charge to bring against him. It was,
however, a case of "diamond cut diamond," as the proverb has it, for
Pharnabazus, while he ostensibly promised to do everything that
Lysander wished, and to send publicly a letter dictated by him, had by
him another privately-written despatch, and when the seals were about
to be affixed, as the two letters looked exactly alike, he substituted
the privately-written one for that which Lysander had seen. When then
Lysander reached Lacedæmon, and proceeded, as it customary, to the
senate-house, he handed over to the Ephors this letter of Pharnabazus,
with the conviction that thereby he was quashing the most important of
all the charges against himself; for Pharnabazus was much loved by the
Lacedæmonians, because he had taken their part in the war more
zealously than any other Persian satrap. When, however, the Ephors
showed him the letter, and he perceived that "Others besides
Odysseus[153] can contrive," he retired in great confusion, and a few
days afterwards, on meeting with the Ephors, informed them that he
must go and pay a sacrifice to Ammon[154]; which he had vowed before
winning his victories. Some historians tell us that this was true, and
that when he was besieging Aphytæ, a city in Thrace, the god Ammon
appeared to him in a dream; in consequence of which he raised the
siege, imagining this to be the will of the god, ordered the
inhabitants to sacrifice to Ammon, and himself made preparations for
proceeding at once to Libya to propitiate the god. Most persons,
however, imagined that this was a mere pretence, but that really he
feared the Ephors, and was unable to endure the harsh discipline of
life at Sparta, and therefore wished to travel abroad, just as a horse
longs for liberty when he has been brought back out of wide pastures
to his stable and his accustomed work. As to the cause which Ephorus
gives for these travels of his, I will mention that presently.

XXI. After having with great difficulty obtained permission from the
Ephors, he set sail. Now as soon as he left the country, the two
kings, perceiving that by means of his device of governing the cities
of Greece by aristocratic clubs devoted to his interest he was
virtually master of the whole country, determined to restore the
popular party to power and to turn out Lysander's friends. When
however this movement was set on foot, and when first of all the
Athenians starting from Phyle attacked the Thirty and overpowered
them, Lysander returned in haste, and prevailed upon the Lacedæmonians
to assist the cause of oligarchy and put down these popular risings.
They decided that the first government which they would aid should be
that of the Thirty, at Athens; and they proposed to send them a
hundred talents for the expenses of the war, and Lysander himself as
their general. But the two kings, envying his power, and fearing that
he would take Athens a second time, determined that one of themselves
should proceed thither in his stead. Pausanias accordingly went to
Athens, nominally to assist the Thirty against the people, but really
to put an end to the war, for fear that Lysander by means of his
friends might a second time become master of Athens. This he easily
effected; and by reconciling all classes of Athenians to one another
and putting an end to the revolution, he made it impossible for
Lysander to win fresh laurels. But when shortly afterwards the
Athenians again revolted he was much blamed for having allowed the
popular party to gather strength and break out of bounds, after it had
once been securely bridled by an oligarchy, while Lysander on the
contrary gained the credit of having, in every city, arranged matters
not with a view to theatrical effect, but to the solid advantage of
Sparta.

LIFE OF SULLA.

I. Lucius Cornelius Sulla,[162] by birth, belonged to the Patricians,
whom we may consider as corresponding to the Eupatridæ. Among his
ancestors is enumerated Rufinus,[163] who became consul; but is less
noted for attaining this honour than for the infamy which befell him.
He was detected in possessing above ten pounds' weight of silver
plate, which amount the law did not permit, and he was ejected from
the Senate. His immediate descendants continued in a mean condition,
and Sulla himself was brought up with no great paternal property. When
he was a young man he lived in lodgings, for which he paid some
moderate sum, which he was afterwards reproached with, when he was
prospering beyond his deserts, as some thought. It was after the
Libyan expedition, when he was assuming airs of importance and a
haughty tone, that a man of high rank and character said to him, How
can you be an honest man who are now so rich, and yet your father left
you nothing? For though the Romans no longer remained true to their
former integrity and purity of morals, but had declined from the old
standard, and let in luxury and expense among them, they still
considered it equally a matter of reproach for a man to have wasted
the property that he once had, and not to remain as poor as his
ancestors. Subsequently when Sulla was in the possession of power and
was putting many to death, a man of the class of Libertini, who was
suspected of concealing a proscribed person, and for this offence was
going to be thrown down the Tarpeian rock, reproached Sulla with the
fact that they had lived together for some time in one house; that he
had paid two thousand sestertii for his lodgings, which were in the
upper part of the house, and Sulla three thousand for the lower rooms;
and, consequently, that between their fortunes there was only the
difference of a thousand sestertii, which is equivalent to two hundred
and fifty Attic drachmæ. This is what is recorded of Sulla's early
condition.

II. As for his person, we may judge of it by his statues, except his
eyes and complexion. His eyes were an uncommonly pure and piercing
blue, which the colour of his face rendered still more terrific,
being spotted with rough red blotches, interspersed with the white;
from which circumstance, it is said, he got his name Sulla, which had
reference to his complexion; and one of the Athenian satirists[164] in
derision made the following verse in allusion to it:

It is not out of place to avail ourselves of such traits of a man who
is said to have had so strong a natural love of buffoonery, that when
he was still young and of no repute, he spent his time and indulged
himself among mimi[165] and jesters; and when he was at the head of
the state, he daily got together from the scena and the theatre the
lewdest persons, with whom he would drink and enter into a contest of
coarse witticisms, in which he had no regard to his age, and, besides
degrading the dignity of his office, he neglected many matters that
required attention. It was not Sulla's habit when he was at table to
trouble himself about anything serious, but though he was energetic
and rather morose at other times, he underwent a complete change as
soon as he went into company and was seated at an entertainment, for
he was then exceedingly complaisant to singers of mimi and dancers,
and easy of access and affable. This habit of relaxation seems to have
produced in him the vice of being exceedingly addicted to women and
that passion for enjoyment which stuck to him to his old age. In his
youth he was for a long time attached to one Metrobius,[166] an
actor. The following incident also happened to him:--He formed an
attachment to a woman named Nicopolis, who was of mean condition, but
rich, and from long familiarity and the favour which he found on
account of his youth, he came to be considered as a lover, and when
the woman died she left him her heir. He also succeeded to the
inheritance of his step-mother, who loved him as her own son; and in
this way he acquired a moderate fortune.

III. On being appointed Quæstor to Marius in his first consulship, he
sailed with him to Libya, to prosecute the war against Jugurtha.[167]
In this campaign he showed himself a man of merit, and by availing
himself of a favourable opportunity he made a friend of Bocchus, king
of the Numidians. Some ambassadors of Bocchus who had escaped from
Numidian robbers were hospitably received by Sulla, and sent back with
presents and a safe conduct. Now Bocchus happened for some time to
have disliked his son-in-law Jugurtha, whom he was also afraid of; and
as Jugurtha had been defeated by the Romans and had fled to Bocchus,
he formed a design to make him his prisoner and deliver him to his
enemies; but as he wished Sulla to be the agent rather than himself,
he invited Sulla to come and see him. Sulla communicated the message
to Marius, and, taking a few soldiers with him, ventured on the
hazardous enterprise of putting himself in the hands of a barbarian
who never kept his faith even with his friends, and this for the
purpose of having another man betrayed to him. Bocchus, having got
both of them in his power, was under the necessity of being
treacherous to one of them, and after great fluctuations in his
resolution, he finally carried into effect his original perfidious
design, and surrendered Jugurtha to Sulla. Marius enjoyed the triumph
for the capture of Jugurtha, but the honour of the success was given
to Sulla through dislike of Marius, which caused Marius some
uneasiness; for Sulla was naturally of an arrogant disposition, and as
this was the first occasion, on which he had been raised from a mean
condition and obscurity to be of some note among his fellow-citizens,
and had tasted the sweets of distinction, he carried his pride so far
as to have a seal-ring cut, on which the occurrence was represented,
and he wore it constantly. The subject represented was Bocchus
surrendering and Sulla receiving the surrender of Jugurtha.

IV. Though Marius was annoyed at this, yet as he still thought Sulla
beneath his jealousy, he employed him in his campaigns--in his second
consulship in the capacity of legate, and in his third consulship as
tribune;[168] and by his instrumentality Marius effected many
important objects. In his capacity of legate Sulla took Copillius,
king of the Tectosages;[169] and when he was a tribune he persuaded
the powerful and populous nation of the Marsi[170] to become friends
and allies to Rome. But now perceiving that Marius was jealous of him,
and was no longer willing to give him the opportunity of
distinguishing himself, but opposed his further rise, Sulla attached
himself to Catulus, the colleague of Marius, who was an honest man,
but inactive as a soldier. Sulla being entrusted by Catulus with all
matters of the greatest moment, thus attained both influence and
reputation. In his military operations he reduced a large part of the
Alpine barbarians; and on one occasion, when there was a scarcity of
provisions in the camp, he undertook to supply the want, which he did
so effectually that the soldiers of Catulus had not only abundance for
themselves, but were enabled to relieve the army of Marius. This, as
Sulla himself says, greatly annoyed Marius. Now this enmity, so slight
and childish in its foundation and origin, was continued through
civil war and the inveterate animosity of faction, till it resulted in
the establishment of a tyranny and the complete overthrow of the
constitution; which shows that Euripides[171] was a wise man and well
acquainted with the diseases incident to states, when he warned
against ambition, as the most dangerous and the worst of dæmons to
those who are governed by her.

V. Sulla now thought that his military reputation entitled him to
aspire to a political career, and accordingly as soon as the campaign
was ended he began to seek the favour of the people, and became a
candidate for the prætorship; but he was disappointed in his
expectations. He attributed his failure to the populace, for he says
that they knew he was a friend of Bocchus, and if he filled the office
of ædile before that of prætor, they expected to have brilliant
hunting exhibitions and fights of Libyan[172] wild beasts, and that
therefore they elected others to the prætorship, with the view of
forcing him to serve as ædile. But that Sulla does not state the real
cause of his failure appears evident from what followed. In the next
year he obtained the prætorship, having gained the votes of the
people, partly by solicitation and partly by bribery. It was in
allusion to this, and during his prætorship when he was threatening
Cæsar[173] to use his own authority against him, that Cæsar replied
with a laugh, You are right in considering your authority as your own,
for you bought it. After the expiration of his prætorship he was sent
to Cappadocia, for the purpose, as it was given out, of restoring
Ariobarzanes[174] to his power, but in reality to check
Mithridates,[175] who was very active and was acquiring new territory
and dominion as extensive as what he already had. Sulla took with him
no large force of his own, but meeting with zealous co-operation on
the part of the allies, he slaughtered a great number of the
Cappadocians, and on another occasion a still greater number of
Armenians who had come to the relief of the Cappadocians, drove out
Gordius, and declared Ariobarzanes king. While he was staying near the
Euphrates, the Parthian general Orobazus, a commander of King
Arsaces,[176] had an interview with him, which was the first occasion
on which the two nations met; and this also may be considered as one
of the very fortunate events in Sulla's successful career, that he was
the first Roman to whom the Parthians addressed themselves in their
request for an alliance and friendship with Rome. Sulla is said to
have had three chairs placed, one for Ariobarzanes, another for
Orobazus, and a third for himself, on which he took his seat between
the two, while the business was transacted. The king of the Parthians
is said to have put Orobazus to death for submitting to this
indignity; as to Sulla, some commended him for his haughty treatment
of the barbarians, while others blamed him for his arrogance and
ill-timed pride. It is said there was a man among the attendants of
Orobazus, a Chaldæan,[177] who examined the countenance of Sulla and
observed the movements of his mind and body, not as an idle spectator,
but studying his character according to the principles of his art, and
he declared that of necessity that man must become the first of men,
and he wondered that he could endure not to be the first already. On
his return to Rome Censorinus[178] instituted proceedings against
Sulla on the charge of having received large sums of money, contrary
to express law, from a king who was a friend and ally of the Romans.
Censorinus did not bring the matter to a trial, but gave up the
prosecution.

VI. His quarrel with Marius was kindled anew by fresh matter supplied
by the ostentation of King Bocchus, who, with the view of flattering
the Roman people and pleasing Sulla, dedicated in the Capitol some
figures bearing trophies, and by the side of them placed a gilded
figure of Jugurtha being surrendered by himself to Sulla. Marius was
highly incensed and attempted to take the figures down, while others
were ready to support Sulla, and the city was all but in a flame
through the two factions, when the Social War which had long
smouldered burst forth in a blaze upon Rome and stopped the civil
discord. In this most serious war, which was attended with many
variations of fortune, and brought on the Romans the greatest misery
and the most formidable dangers, Marius by his inability to accomplish
anything of importance showed that military excellence requires bodily
vigour and strength: but Sulla by his great exploits obtained among
his own citizens the reputation of a great commander, among his
friends the reputation of the very greatest, and among his enemies too
the reputation of the most fortunate of generals. Sulla did not behave
like Timotheus[179] the son of Konon, whose success was attributed by
his enemies to fortune, and they had paintings made in which he was
represented asleep while Fortune was throwing a net over the cities,
all which he took in a very boorish way, and got into a passion with
his enemies, as if they were thus attempting to deprive him of the
honour due to his exploits; and on one occasion, returning from a
successful expedition, he said to the people, "Well, Fortune has had
no share in this campaign, at least, Athenians." Now, as the story
goes, Fortune[180] showed her spite to Timotheus in return for his
arrogance, and he never did anything great afterwards, but failing in
all his undertakings and becoming odious to the people, he was at last
banished from the city. But Sulla by gladly accepting such
felicitations on his prosperity and such admiration, and even
contributing to strengthen these notions and to invest them with
somewhat of a sacred character, made all his exploits depend on
Fortune; whether it was that he did this for the sake of display, or
because he really had such opinions of the deity. Indeed he has
recorded in his memoirs, that the actions which he resolved upon
without deliberation, and on the spur of the moment, turned out more
successfully than those which appeared to have been best considered.
And again, from the passage in which he says that he was made more for
fortune than for war, he appears to attribute more to fortune than to
his merit, and to consider himself completely as the creature of the
dæmon;[181] nay, he cites as a proof of good fortune due to the
favour of the gods his harmony with Metellus, a man of the same rank
with himself, and his father-in-law, for he expected that Metellus
would cause him a good deal of trouble, whereas he was a most
accommodating colleague.[182] Further, in his memoirs which he
dedicated to Lucullus, he advises him to think nothing so safe as what
the dæmon enjoins during the night. When he was leaving the city with
his troops for the Social War, as he tells us in his memoirs, a great
chasm opened in the earth near Laverna,[183] from which a quantity of
fire burst forth, and a bright flame rose like a column to the skies.
The diviners said that a brave man, of an appearance different from
and superior to ordinary men, would obtain the command and relieve the
city from its present troubles, Sulla says this man was himself, for
the golden colour of his hair was a peculiarity in his personal
appearance, and that he had no diffidence about bearing testimony to
his own merits after so many illustrious exploits. So much as to his
religious opinions. As to the other parts of his character, he was
irregular and inconsistent: he would take away much, and give more; he
would confer honours without any good reason, and do a grievous wrong
with just as little reason; he courted those whose assistance he
wanted, and behaved with arrogance to those who wanted his aid; so
that one could not tell whether he had naturally more haughtiness or
subserviency. For as to his inconsistency in punishing, sometimes
inflicting death for the slightest matters, and at others quietly
bearing the greatest wrongs, his ready reconciliations with his deadly
enemies, and his prosecution of slight and trifling offences with
death and confiscation of property--all this may be explained on the
supposition that he was naturally of a violent and vindictive temper,
but sometimes moderated his passion upon calculations of interest.
During this Social War his soldiers killed with sticks and stones a
man of Prætorian rank, who was his legatus, Albinus[184] by name, an
outrage which Sulla overlooked, and made no inquiry about: he went so
far as to say, with apparent seriousness, that the soldiers would
bestir themselves the more in the war and make amends for their fault
by their courage. As to any blame that was imputed to him, he cared
not for it; but having already formed the design of overthrowing the
power of Marius and of getting himself appointed to the command
against Mithridates, as the Social War was now considered at an end,
he endeavoured to ingratiate himself with his army. On coming to Rome
he was elected consul with Quintus Pompeius[185] for his colleague,
being now fifty years of age, and he formed a distinguished
matrimonial alliance with Cæcilia,[186] the daughter of Metellus,[187]
the chief Pontifex. This gave occasion to the populace to assail him
with satirical songs; and many of the highest class were displeased at
the marriage, as if they did not think him worthy of such a wife, whom
they had judged to be worthy of the consulship, as Titus Livius[188]
remarks. Cæcilia was not the only wife that Sulla had. When he was a
very young man he married Ilia, who bore him a daughter; his second
wife was Ælia; and his third wife was Clœlia, whom he divorced on the
ground of barrenness, yet in a manner honourable to the lady, with an
ample testimony to her virtues and with presents. But as he married
Metella a few days after, it was believed that his alleged ground of
divorce was merely a pretext. However, he always paid great respect to
Metella, which induced the Romans, when they wished to recall from
exile the partisans of Marius, and Sulla refused his assent, to apply
to Metella to intercede for them. After the capture of Athens also, it
was supposed that he treated the citizens with more severity, because
they had cast aspersions upon Metella from their walls. But of this
hereafter.

VII. Sulla looked on the consulship as only a small matter compared
with what he expected to attain: the great object of his desires was
the command in the war against Mithridates. But he had a rival in
Marius, who was moved by an insane love of distinction and by
ambition, passions which never grow old in a man, for though he was
now unwieldy and had done no service in the late campaigns by reason
of his age, he still longed for the command in a distant war beyond
the seas. While Sulla was with the army completing some matters that
still remained to be finished, Marius kept at home and hatched that
most pestilent faction which did more mischief to Rome than all her
wars; and indeed the deity[189] showed by signs what was coming. Fire
spontaneously blazed from the wooden shafts which supported the
military standards, and was quenched with difficulty; and three crows
brought their young into the public road, and after devouring them,
carried the fragments back to their nest. The mice in a temple gnawed
the gold which was kept there, and the keeper of the temple caught one
of the mice, a female, in a trap, which produced in the trap five
young ones, and devoured three of them. But what was chief of all,
from a cloudless and clear sky there came the sound of a trumpet, so
shrill and mournful, that by reason of the greatness thereof men were
beside themselves and crouched for fear. The Tuscan seers interpreted
this to portend the commencement of a new period, and a general
change. They say that there are in all eight periods, which differ in
mode of life and habits altogether from one another, and to each
period is assigned by the deity a certain number of years determined
by the revolution of a great year. When a period is completed, the
commencement of another is indicated by some wondrous sign on the
earth or from the heavens, so as to make it immediately evident to
those who attend to such matters and have studied them, that men are
now adopting other habits and modes of life, and are less or more an
object of care to the gods than the men of former periods. They say,
in the change from one period to another there are great alterations,
and that the art of the seer at one time is held in high repute, and
is successful in its predictions, when the deity gives clear and
manifest signs, but that in the course of another period the art falls
into a low condition, being for the most part conjectural, and
attempting to know the future by equivocal and misty signs. Now this
is what the Tuscan wise men said, who are supposed to know more of
such things than anybody else. While the senate was communicating on
these omens with the seers, in the temple of Bellona,[190] a sparrow
flew in before the whole body with a grasshopper in his mouth, part of
which he dropped, and the rest he carried off with him out of the
place. From this the interpreters of omens apprehended faction and
divisions between the landholders on the one side and the city folk
and the merchant class on the other, for the latter were loud and
noisy like a grasshopper, but the owners of land kept quiet on their
estates.

VIII. Now Marius contrived to gain over the tribune Sulpicius,[191] a
man without rival in any kind of villainy, and so one need not inquire
whom he surpassed in wickedness, but only wherein he surpassed
himself. For in him were combined cruelty, audacity, and
rapaciousness, without any consideration of shame or of any crime,
inasmuch as he sold the Roman citizenship to libertini[192] and
resident aliens, and publicly received the money at a table in the
Forum. He maintained three thousand men armed with daggers, and also a
number of young men of the equestrian class always about him, and
ready for anything, whom he called the Opposition Senate. He caused a
law to be passed that no Senator should contract debt[193] to the
amount of more than two thousand drachmæ, and yet at his death he left
behind him a debt of three millions. This man being let loose
upon the people by Marius, and putting everything into a state of
confusion by violence and force of arms, framed various pernicious
laws, and among them that which gave to Marius the command in the
Mithridatic war. The consuls accordingly declared a cessation[194] of
all public business; but while they were holding a meeting of the
people near the temple of Castor and Pollux, Sulpicius with his rabble
attacked them, and among many others massacred the youthful son of
Pompeius in the Forum; Pompeius only escaped by hiding himself. Sulla
was pursued into the house of Marius, from which he was compelled to
come out and repeal the edict for the cessation of public business;
and it was for this reason that Sulpicius, though he deprived Pompeius
of his office, did not take the consulship from Sulla, but, merely
transferred the command of the Mithridatic war to Marius, and sent
some tribunes forthwith to Nola to take the army and lead it to
Marius.

IX. But Sulla made his escape to the camp before the tribunes arrived,
and the soldiers hearing of what had passed, stoned them to death;
upon which the partisans of Marius murdered the friends of Sulla who
were in the city, and seized their property. This caused many persons
to betake themselves to flight, some going to the city from the camp,
and others from the camp to the city. The Senate was not its own
master, but was compelled to obey the orders of Marius and Sulpicius;
and on hearing that Sulla was marching upon Rome, they sent to him two
of the prætors, Brutus and Servilius, to forbid him to advance any
further. The prætors, who assumed a bold tone before Sulla, narrowly
escaped being murdered; as it was, the soldiers broke their fasces,
stripped them of their senatorial dress, and sent them back with every
insult. It caused dejection in the city to see the prætors return
without their insignia of office, and to hear them report that the
commotion could not be checked, and was past all remedy. Now the
partisans of Marius were making their preparations, while Sulla with
his colleague and six complete legions was moving from Nola; he saw
that the army was ready to march right to the city, but he had some
hesitation himself, and feared the risk.[195] However upon Sulla
making a sacrifice, the seer Postumius, after inspecting the signs,
stretched out his hands to Sulla and urged him to put him in chains
and keep him a prisoner till the battle took place, declaring that if
everything did not speedily turn out well, he was ready to be put to
death. It is said also that Sulla in his sleep had a vision of the
goddess, whose worship the Romans had learned from the Cappadocians,
whatever her name may be, Selene,[196] Athena, or Enyo. Sulla dreamed
that the goddess stood by him and put a thunderbolt into his hand, and
as she named each of his enemies bade him dart the bolt at them, which
he did, and his enemies were struck to the ground and destroyed. Being
encouraged by the dream, which he communicated to his colleague, at
daybreak Sulla led his forces against Rome. When he was near
Picinæ[197] he was met by a deputation which entreated him not to
march forthwith against the city, for all justice would be done
pursuant to a resolution of the Senate. Sulla consented to encamp
there, and ordered the officers to measure out the ground for the
encampment, according to the usual practice, and the deputation went
away trusting to his promise. But as soon as they were gone, Sulla
sent Lucius Bacillus and Caius Mummius, who seized the gate and that
part of the walls which surrounds the Esquiline hill, and Sulla set
out to join them with all speed. Bacillus and his soldiers broke into
the city and attempted to gain possession of it, but the people in
large numbers, being unarmed, mounted the house-tops, and by pelting
the soldiers with tiles and stones stopped their further progress, and
drove them back to the wall. In the mean time Sulla had come up, and
seeing how matters stood, he called out that the houses must be fired,
and taking a flaming torch, he was the first to advance: he also
ordered the bowmen to shoot firebrands, and to aim at the roofs; in
which he acted without any rational consideration, giving way to
passion, and surrendering the direction of his enterprize to revenge,
for he saw before him only his enemies, and without thought or pity
for his friends and kinsmen, would force his way into Rome with the
help of flames, which know no distinction between the guilty and the
innocent. While this was going on, Marius, who had been driven as far
as the temple of Earth,[198] invited the slaves to join him by
offering them their freedom, but being overpowered by his enemies who
pressed on him, he left the city.

X. Sulla assembled the Senate, who condemned[199] to death Marius and
a few others, among whom was the tribune Sulpicius. Sulpicius was put
to death, being betrayed by a slave, to whom Sulla gave his freedom,
and then ordered him to be thrown down the Tarpeian rock: he set a
price on the head of Marius, which was neither a generous nor a
politic measure, as Marius had shortly before let Sulla off safe when
Sulla put himself into his power by going to the house of Marius. Now
if Marius had not let Sulla go, but had given him up to Sulpicius to
be put to death, he might have secured the supreme power; but he
spared Sulla; and yet a few days after, when Sulla had the same
opportunity, Marius did not obtain from him a like return. The conduct
of Sulla offended the Senate, though they durst not show it; but the
dislike of the people and their dissatisfaction were made apparent to
him by their acts. They contemptuously rejected Nonius, the son of
Sulla's sister, and Servius, who were candidates for offices, and
elected those whose elevation they thought would be most disagreeable
to Sulla. But Sulla pretended to be pleased at this, and to view it as
a proof that the people, by doing what they liked, were really
indebted to him for their liberty; and for the purpose of diminishing
his general unpopularity he managed the election of Lucius
Cinna,[200] who was of the opposite faction, to the consulship, having
first bound him by solemn imprecations and oaths to favour his
measures. Cinna ascended the Capitol with a stone in his hand and took
the oath; then pronouncing an imprecation on himself, that, if he did
not keep faithful to Sulla, he might be cast out of the city as the
stone from his hand, he hurled it to the ground in the presence of a
large number of persons. But as soon as Cinna had received the
consulship, he attempted to disturb the present settlement of affairs,
and prepared to institute a process against Sulla, and induced
Virginius, one of the tribunes, to be the accuser; but Sulla,[201]
without caring for him or the court, set out with his army against
Mithridates.

XI. It is said that about the time when Sulla was conducting his
armament from Italy, many omens occurred to Mithridates, who was
staying in Pergamum, and that a Victory, bearing a crown, which the
people of Pergamum were letting down upon him by some machinery from
above, was broken in pieces just as it was touching his head, and the
crown falling upon the theatre, came to the ground and was destroyed,
which made the spectators shudder and greatly dispirited Mithridates,
though his affairs were then going on favourably beyond all
expectation. For he had taken Asia[202] from the Romans, and Bithynia
and Cappadocia from their kings, and had fixed himself at Pergamum,
where he was distributing wealth and provinces and kingdoms among his
friends; one of his sons also held without any opposition the ancient
dominions in Pontus, and the Bosporus[203] as far as the uninhabited
regions beyond the Mæotis; Ariarathes[204] occupied Thrace and
Macedonia with a large army; and his generals with their forces were
subduing other places. Archelaus,[205] the greatest of his generals,
was master of all the sea with his navy, and was subjugating the
Cyclades[206] and all the other islands east of Malea, and had already
taken Eubœa, while with his army, advancing from Athens as his
starting-point, he was gaining over all the nations of Greece as far
north as Thessaly, and had only sustained a slight check near
Chæroneia. For there he was met by Bruttius Sura,[207] a legatus of
Sentius, prætor of Macedonia, and a man of signal courage and
prudence. Archelaus was sweeping through Bœotia like a torrent, when
he was vigorously opposed by Sura, who, after fighting three battles
near Chæroneia, repulsed him and drove him back to the coast. On
receiving orders from Lucius Lucullus[208] to make room for Sulla, who
was coming, and to allow him to carry on the war, for which he had
received his commission, Sura immediately left Bœotia and went back to
Sentius, though he had succeeded beyond his expectations, and Greece
was well disposed to change sides on account of his great merit.
However, these exploits of Bruttius were very brilliant.

XII. Now all the rest of the Grecian cities immediately sent
deputations to Sulla and invited him to enter; but against Athens,
which was compelled by the tyrant Aristion[209] to be on the king's
side, he directed all his energies; he also hemmed in and blockaded
the Peiræus,[210] employing every variety of engine and every mode of
attack. If he had waited a short time, he might have taken the Upper
City without danger, for through want of provisions it was reduced by
famine to extreme necessity; but anxious to return to Rome, and
fearing a new revolution there, at great risk fighting many battles
and at great cost he urged on the war, wherein, besides the rest of
the expenditure, the labour about the military engines required ten
thousand pair of mules to be daily employed on this service. As wood
began to fail, owing to many of the works being destroyed by their own
weight, and burnt by the incessant fires thrown by the enemy, Sulla
laid his hands on the several groves and levelled the trees in the
Academia,[211] which was the best wooded of the suburbs, and those in
the Lycæum. And as he wanted money also for the war, he violated the
sacred depositaries of Greece, sending for the finest and most costly
of the offerings dedicated in Epidaurus[212] and Olympia. He wrote
also to the Amphiktyons[213] to Delphi, saying that it would be better
for the treasures of the god to be brought to him, for he would either
have them in safer keeping, or, if he used them, he would replace
them; and he sent one of his friends, Kaphis, a Phokian, to receive
all the things after they were first weighed. Kaphis went to Delphi,
but he was afraid to touch the sacred things, and in the presence of
the Amphiktyons he deeply lamented the task that was imposed on him.
Upon some of them saying that they heard the lute in the shrine send
forth a sound, Kaphis either believing what they said or wishing to
inspire Sulla with some religious fear, sent him this information. But
Sulla replied in a scoffing tone, he wondered Kaphis did not
understand that such music was a sign of pleasure and not of anger,
and he bade him take courage and seize the property, as the deity was
quite willing, and in fact offered it. Now all the things were
secretly sent off unobserved by most of the Greeks; but the silver
jar, one of the royal presents which still remained, could not be
carried away by the beasts of burden owing to its weight and size, and
the Amphiktyons were accordingly obliged to cut it in pieces; and this
led them to reflect that Titus Flamininus,[214] and Manius Acilius,
and also Æmilius Paulus--Acilius, who drove Antiochus out of Greece;
and the two others, who totally defeated the kings of Macedonia--not
only refrained from touching the Greek temples, but even gave them
presents and showed them great honour and respect. These generals,
however, were legally appointed to command troops consisting of
well-disciplined soldiers, who had been taught to obey their leaders
without a murmur: and the commanders themselves were men of kingly
souls, and moderate in their living and satisfied with a small fixed
expenditure, and they thought it baser to attempt to win the soldiers'
favour than to fear their enemies. But the generals at this time, as
they acquired their rank by violence and not by merit, and had more
occasion to employ arms against one another than against the enemies
of Rome, were compelled to act the demagogue while they were in
command; and by purchasing the services of the soldiers by the money
which they expended to gratify them, they made the Roman state a thing
for bargain and sale, and themselves the slaves of the vilest wretches
in order that they might domineer over honest men. This is what drove
Marius into exile, and then brought him back to oppose Sulla; this
made Cinna the murderer of Octavius,[215] and Fimbria[216] the
murderer of Flaccus. And Sulla mainly laid the foundation of all this
by his profusion and expenditure upon his own soldiers, the object of
which was to corrupt and gain over to his side the soldiers of other
commanders; so that his attempts to seduce the troops of others and
the extravagance by which his own soldiers were corrupted, made money
always necessary to him; and most particularly during the siege of
Athens.

XIII. Now Sulla was seized with a violent and irresistible desire to
take Athens, whether it was that he was ambitious to contend against a
city which retained only the shadow of its former glory, or that he
was moved by passion to revenge the scoffs and jeers with which the
tyrant Aristion irritated him and his wife Metella, by continually
taunting them from the wall and insulting them. This Aristion was a
compound of lewdness and cruelty, who combined in himself all the
worst of the vices and passions of Mithridates, and now had brought as
it were a mortal disease in its last extremities upon a city which had
come safe out of so many wars and escaped from so many tyrannies and
civil commotions. For now when a medimnus[217] of wheat was selling
for a thousand drachmæ in the Upper City, and men were obliged to eat
the parthenium[218] that grew about the Acropolis, and shoes and
oil-flasks, he was drinking all day long and amusing himself with
revels and pyrrhic dances, and making jokes at the enemy: he let the
sacred light of the goddess go out for want of oil; when the
hierophant sent to ask for the twelfth part of a medimnus of wheat, he
sent her as much pepper; and when the members of the Senate and the
priests entreated him to have pity on the city and come to terms with
Sulla, he dispersed them by ordering the archers to fire on them. At
last being persuaded with great difficulty, he sent two or three of
his boon companions to treat of peace; but instead of making any
reasonable proposals, the men began to make a pompous harangue about
Theseus and Eumolpus, and the Persian wars, on which Sulla said, "Be
gone, my good fellows, with your fine talk. I was not sent to Athens
by the Romans to learn a lesson, but to compel rebels to submit."

XIV. In the mean time, as the story goes, some soldiers in the
Keramicus[219] overheard certain old men talking to one another, and
abusing the tyrant for not guarding the approach to the wall about the
Heptachalkum, which was the only part, they said, where it was
practicable and easy for the enemy to get over; and the soldiers
reported to Sulla what they heard. Sulla did not neglect the
intelligence, but he went to the spot by night, and seeing that it was
practicable, he set about the thing forthwith. He says in his Memoirs
that the first man who mounted the wall was Marcus Teius,[220] who,
finding a soldier in his way, struck him a violent blow on the helmet,
which broke his sword; still Marcus did not retreat, but kept his
ground. The city then was taken from this quarter, as the old
Athenians said it might be. Sulla having destroyed and levelled that
part of the wall which lies between the Peiræic and the Sacred[221]
Gate, about midnight entered the city, striking terror with the sound
of trumpets and horns, and the shouts and cries of the soldiers, who
had his full licence to plunder and kill, and made their way through
the streets with naked swords. The slain were not counted, but the
number is even now measured by the space over which the blood flowed.
For besides those who were slaughtered in the other parts of the city,
the blood of those who fell about the Agora[222] covered all the
Keramicus within Dipylum: many say that it even flowed through the
gates and deluged the suburbs. But though the number of those who
perished by the sword was so great, as many killed themselves for
sorrow and regret at the overthrow of their native city. For all the
most honest citizens were driven to despair, expecting in Sulla
neither humanity nor moderation. But, however, when Meidias and
Kalliphon, who were exiles, fell down at his knees with entreaties,
and the Senators who were in his army urged him to save the city,
being now sated with vengeance and passing some encomiums upon the
ancient Athenians, he said he would pardon the many for the sake of
the few, and the living for the sake of the dead. Sulla states in his
Memoirs, that he took Athens on the Calends of March,[223] which day
nearly coincides with the new moon of Anthesterion, in which month it
happens that the Athenians perform many ceremonies in commemoration of
the great damage and loss occasioned by the heavy rain, for they
suppose that the deluge happened pretty nearly about that time. When
the city was taken the tyrant retreated to the Acropolis, where he was
besieged by Curio, who was commissioned for this purpose: after he had
held out for some time, Aristion was compelled to surrender for want
of water; his surrender was immediately followed by a token from the
deity, for on the very day and hour on which Curio took the tyrant
from the Acropolis, the clouds gathered in the clear sky, and a
violent shower descended which filled the Acropolis with water. Sulla
soon took the Peiræus also, and burnt the greater part of it,
including the arsenal of Philo,[224] which was a wonderful work.

XIX. While Archelaus was extending his right wing, in order to
surround the Romans, Hortensius made his cohorts advance at a run,
with the intention of taking the enemy in the flank; but as Archelaus
suddenly wheeled round with his two thousand horsemen, Hortensius was
overpowered by numbers and retreated towards the mountain region,
being gradually separated from the main body of the army and in danger
of being completely hemmed in by the barbarians. Sulla, who was on the
right wing, which was not yet engaged in the action, hearing of the
danger of Hortensius, hastened to relieve him. Archelaus conjecturing
from the dust raised by Sulla's troops how the matter was, left
Hortensius, and wheeling round moved towards the position which Sulla
had quitted (the right), expecting to find the soldiers there without
their general, and to defeat them. At the same time Taxiles led the
Chalkaspides against Murena; and now the shouts being raised from both
armies and re-echoed by the mountains, Sulla halted and hesitated to
which quarter he should move. Having determined to maintain his own
original position, he sent Hortensius with four cohorts to support
Murena, and ordering the fifth to follow him, he hurried to the right
wing, which unaided was bravely resisting Archelaus; but as soon as
Sulla appeared, the Romans completely broke the line of Archelaus, and
pursued the barbarians in disorderly flight to the river and Mount
Akontium. However, Sulla did not leave Murena alone in his dangerous
position, but hastened to help him. Seeing, however, that the Romans
were victorious here also, he joined in the pursuit. Now many of the
barbarians were cut down in the plain, but the greatest number were
destroyed in the attempt to regain their entrenchments, and only ten
thousand out of so large a host made their escape to Chalkis.[243]
Sulla says in his Memoirs, that he missed only fourteen of his own
soldiers, and that ten of them showed themselves in the evening; in
commemoration of which he inscribed on the trophies, Mars and
Victory, and Venus, to signify that he had gained the victory no less
through good fortune than skill and courage. One of these trophies,
which commemorates the victory in the plain, stands where the soldiers
of Archelaus first gave ground in the flight to the Molus:[244] the
other is placed on the summit of Thurium, to commemorate the surprise
of the barbarians, with a Greek inscription in honour of the courage
of Homoloichus and Anaxidamus. Sulla celebrated the festival for the
victory in Thebes at the fountain of Oedipus, where he erected a
stage. The judges were Greeks invited from the other cities of Greece;
for Sulla could not be reconciled to the Thebans; and he took from
them half of their lands, which he dedicated to the Pythian Apollo and
Olympian Jupiter; and from the revenue of these lands he ordered the
sums of money which he had taken from them to be repaid to the
deities.

XX. After the battle Sulla received intelligence that Flaccus,[245]
who belonged to the opposite faction, was chosen consul, and was
crossing the Ionian[246] sea with a force which was said to be
designed against Mithridates, but was in fact directed against
himself; and accordingly he advanced towards Thessalia to meet
Flaccus. He had advanced to the neighbourhood of Meliteia,[247] when
reports from all sides reached him that the country in his rear was
ravaged by another army of Mithridates as numerous as that which he
had dispersed. Dorylaus had landed at Chalkis with a large navy, on
board of which he brought eighty thousand men of the best trained and
disciplined troops of Mithridates, and he immediately advanced into
Bœotia and occupied the country, being eager to draw Sulla to an
engagement, and paying no regard to Archelaus, who dissuaded him from
fighting: he even said publicly that so many thousands could never
have been destroyed if there had not been treachery. However, Sulla,
who quickly returned to Bœotia, showed Dorylaus that Archelaus was a
prudent man and had formed a very just estimate of the courage of the
Romans; for after a slight skirmish with Sulla near Tilphossium,[248]
Dorylaus was himself the first among those who were not for deciding
the matter by a battle, but thought it best to prolong the war till
the Romans should be exhausted by want of supplies. However, Archelaus
was somewhat encouraged by the position of their encampment near
Orchomenus, which was very favourable for battle to an army which had
the superiority in cavalry; for of all the plains in Bœotia noted for
their beauty and extent, this, which commences at the city of
Orchomenus, is the only one which spreads without interruption and
without any trees, and it reaches to the marshes in which the river
Melas[249] is lost. The Melas rises close to Orchomenus, and is the
only river of Greece that is a copious and navigable stream at its
source; it also increases like the Nile about the summer solstice, and
the same plants grow on its banks; but they produce no fruit and do
not attain any large size. Its course however is short, for the larger
part of the water is soon lost in obscure marshes overgrown with
shrubs: a small part joins the Kephisus somewhere about the point
where the lake is said to produce the reed that is adapted for making
musical pipes.

XXI. The two armies being encamped near one another, Archelaus kept
quiet, but Sulla began to dig trenches on both sides with the view,
if possible, of cutting off the enemy from the hard ground and those
parts which were favourable to cavalry and driving them into the
marshes. However, the barbarians would not endure this, and as soon as
their generals allowed them to attack the Romans, they rushed forward
with so much vigour and force, that not only were the men dispersed
who were working at the trenches, but the greater part of the Roman
troops that were drawn up for their protection were involved in the
fight. Upon this Sulla leapt down from his horse, and snatching up a
standard, made his way through the fugitives towards the enemy, crying
out, "For my part, Romans, it is fit I should die here; as for you,
when you are asked where you deserted your Imperator, remember to say
it was in Orchomenus." These words made the soldiers rally, and two
cohorts came to their support from the right wing, which Sulla led
against the enemy and put them to flight. He then led his soldiers
back a short distance, and after allowing them to take some food, he
began again to work at the trenches which were designed to enclose the
enemy's camp. The barbarians made another attack in better order than
before; in which Diogenes, the son of the wife of Archelaus, fell
fighting bravely on the right wing; and the bowmen being hard pressed
by the Romans and having no means of retreat, took their arrows
altogether in their hands, and using them like swords, struck at the
Romans, but, at last they were driven back to their camp, where they
spent a wretched night owing to their wounds and great losses. As soon
as day dawned Sulla again led his soldiers up to the enemy's
encampment and again commenced working at the ditches. The enemy came
out in a great force, but Sulla put them to flight, and as no one
stood his ground after they were thrown into disorder, Sulla stormed
the camp. The swamps and the lake were filled with the blood and
bodies of those who fell, and even to the present day many barbarian
bows, helmets, and pieces of iron cuirasses and swords are found
buried in the marshes, though it is near two hundred[250] years since
the battle. Such, according to the historians, was the battle about
Chæroneia and near Orchomenus.

XXII. Cinna and Carbo[251] were now conducting themselves towards the
chief men at Rome in an illegal and violent manner, and many flying
from their tyranny resorted to the camp of Sulla as a harbour of
refuge, so that in a short time a kind of Senate was formed about him.
Metella also, who had with difficulty escaped with her children, came
and reported that his house and farms were burnt by his enemies, and
she entreated him to go to the assistance of his friends at Rome.
Sulla was perplexed what to do: he could not endure the thoughts of
neglecting his country in her present oppressed condition, nor did he
see how he could leave so great an undertaking as the Mithridatic war
imperfect. In the meantime there came to him a merchant of Delos,[252]
named Archelaus, who secretly brought from Archelaus, the king's
general, hopes of peace and certain proposals. Sulla was so well
pleased that he was eager for an interview with Archelaus, and they
met at Delium on the sea-coast, where the temple of Apollo is.
Archelaus, who began the conference, urged Sulla to give up Asia and
the Pontus, and to sail to Rome to prosecute the war against his
enemies, and he offered him money, ships, and troops on behalf of the
king. Sulla in reply advised Archelaus not to trouble himself any
further about Mithridates, but to assume the kingly title himself and
to become an ally of Rome, and to give up the ships of Mithridates. As
Archelaus professed his detestation of such treachery, Sulla said,
"You then, Archelaus, who are a Cappadocian, and the slave of a
barbarian king, or, if you please, his friend--you refuse to do a base
deed for so splendid a reward, and yet venture to talk about treachery
to me who am a Roman general, and am Sulla, as if you were not that
Archelaus who fled from Chæroneia with a few men out of your one
hundred and twenty thousand, and were hid for two days in the
marshes[253] of Orchomenus, and left Bœotia with all the roads made
impassable by the heaps of dead?" Upon this Archelaus changed his
tone, and humbling himself, entreated Sulla to give up the war and to
come to terms with Mithridates. Sulla accepted the proposal, and peace
was made on the following terms:--Mithridates was to give up Asia[254]
and Paphlagonia, and to surrender Bithynia to Nikomedes, and
Cappadocia to Ariobarzanes, to pay down to the Romans two thousand
talents, and to give them seventy ships fitted with brass and
completely equipped; Sulla was to confirm Mithridates in the rest of
his possessions and to recognise him as an ally of the Romans.

XXIII. These terms being settled, Sulla retraced his steps and marched
through Thessaly and Macedonia to the Hellespont in company with
Archelaus, whom he treated with great respect. Archelaus fell
dangerously ill at Larissa, on which Sulla stopped his march and paid
as much attention to him as if he had been one of his own officers and
fellow-generals. This gave rise to some suspicion that the battle of
Chæroneia was not fairly fought, which was strengthened by the fact
that Sulla restored all the friends of Mithridates whom he had taken
prisoners, except Aristion[255] the tyrant, who was an enemy of
Archelaus, and whom he caused to be poisoned: but the most convincing
proof of all was Sulla's giving the Cappadocian ten thousand plethra
of land in Eubœa, and the title of friend and ally of the Romans.
However, Sulla makes his apology about these matters in his Memoirs.
Ambassadors from Mithridates now arrived, and were ready to accede to
all the terms agreed on, except that the king would not consent to
give up Paphlagonia, and as to the ships he dissented altogether; on
which Sulla in a passion exclaimed, "What say ye? Mithridates claims
to keep Paphlagonia, and refuses to abide by the agreement about the
ships; I thought he would have been thankful if I left him his right
hand, which has destroyed so many Romans. However, he will soon speak
another language when I have crossed over to Asia. At present let him
stay in Pergamum and there direct the conduct of a campaign which he
has not seen." The ambassadors were so much alarmed that they said
nothing, but Archelaus implored Sulla and tried to soften his anger,
clinging to his hands with tears in his eyes. At last he prevailed on
Sulla to let him go to Mithridates, and he promised to effect a peace
on Sulla's own terms, or to kill himself. Sulla accordingly sent
Archelaus to Mithridates, and in the mean time he invaded Mædike,[256]
and having ravaged the greater part of it, returned to Macedonia and
found Archelaus at Philippi,[257] who reported that all was
favourable, but that Mithridates much wished to have an interview with
him. Mithridates was mainly induced to this by the circumstance that
Fimbria, after murdering the consul Flaccus, who belonged to the
opposite faction, and defeating the generals of Mithridates, was
advancing against the king himself. It was fear of Fimbria that made
Mithridates more inclined to make a friend of Sulla.

XXIV. Accordingly they met at Dardanus[258] in the Troad: Mithridates
had there two hundred rowing-ships, twenty thousand heavy-armed
soldiers, six thousand horsemen, and many of his scythe-bearing
chariots: Sulla had four cohorts and two hundred horsemen. Mithridates
advanced to meet Sulla and held out his hand, on which Sulla asked him
if he would put an end to the war on the terms agreed to by Archelaus.
As the king made no reply, Sulla said, "Well, those who sue must speak
first; conquerors may remain silent." Mithridates began an apology, in
which he partly imputed the origin of the war to the deities, and
partly threw the blame on the Romans; but Sulla cut him short by
saying, that he had long ago been told, and now he knew by his own
experience, that Mithridates was a most skilful speaker, inasmuch as
he had no difficulty in finding words to justify acts which were so
base and so contrary to all right. Sulla went on to recapitulate all
that Mithridates had done, reproaching him in bitter terms, and he
then asked him again, if he would abide by the agreement of Archelaus.
Mithridates said that he would; on which Sulla embraced him, threw his
arms round him and kissed him; he then brought forward the kings
Ariobarzanes and Nikomedes, and reconciled Mithridates to them. After
surrendering to Sulla seventy ships and five hundred bowmen,
Mithridates sailed off to the Pontus. Sulla perceived that his
soldiers were dissatisfied at the settlement of the war: they thought
it a shame that the greatest enemy of the Romans, who had contrived
the massacre of one hundred and fifty thousand Romans in Asia in one
day, should be seen sailing off with the wealth and the spoils of
Asia, which he had been plundering and levying contributions on for
four years; Sulla apologised to the soldiers by saying that he should
not be able to oppose both Fimbria and Mithridates, if they were
united against him.

XXVI. Sulla set sail from Ephesus with all his ships, and on the third
day anchored in the Peiræus. After being initiated into the
Eleusinian[260] mysteries, he appropriated to himself the library of
Apellikon[261] of Teos, which contained most of the writings of
Aristotle and Theophrastus. The works of these two philosophers were
not then well known to people in general. It is said that when the
library was brought to Rome, Tyrannio the grammarian arranged most of
the books, and that Andronikus of Rhodes having procured copies from
Tyrannio, published them, and made the tables which are now in use. It
appears that the older Peripatetics were indeed well-instructed men,
and devoted to letters, but they did not possess many of the writings
of Aristotle and Theophrastus, nor yet correct copies, owing to the
circumstances that the books came into the hands of the heirs of
Neleus of Skepsis, to whom Theophrastus bequeathed them, and that they
were ignorant persons, who never troubled themselves about such
matters. While Sulla was staying at Athens, he was seized with a
numbness in his feet, accompanied with a feeling of heaviness, which
Strabo[262] calls "a stammering of gout." Accordingly he crossed the
sea to Ædepsus[263]; where he used the warm springs, at the same time
indulging in relaxation and spending all his time in the company of
actors. As he was walking about on the seashore, some fishermen
presented him with some very fine fish; Sulla was much pleased with
the present, but on hearing that the men belonged to Halæae,[264] he
said, What, is there an Halæan still alive? For it happened, that
while pursuing his enemies after the victory at Orchomenus, he
destroyed at once three Bœotian cities, Anthedon, Larymna, and Halæae.
The men were struck speechless with fear, but Sulla with a smile bade
them go away in good heart, for the intercessors they had brought were
no mean ones, and not to be despised. Upon this the Halæans say they
took courage and again occupied their city.

XXVlI. Sulla went through Thessaly and Macedonia to the sea-coast,
where he made preparations to cross from Dyrrachium[265] to Brundisium
with twelve hundred ships. Near to Dyrrachium is Apollonia, and near
to Apollonia is the Nymphæum,[266] a sacred spot, where perpetual
streams of fire rise in various places out of a green grassy valley.
It is said that a sleeping satyr was caught there, such a one as
sculptors and painters represent, and was brought to Sulla and
questioned by many interpreters as to who he was; but he spoke with
difficulty, and what he did utter was unintelligible, and something
like a compound of the neighing of a horse and the bleating of a goat;
upon which Sulla, who was startled at the monster, ordered him to be
removed. Sulla was now about to take his soldiers over the sea, but he
feared that when they landed in Italy they would disperse to their
several cities; however, the soldiers voluntarily took an oath to
abide by him, and not to do any damage in Italy from set design;
seeing also that he required much money, they all contributed
something from what they had, each according to his means. However,
Sulla would not receive the contribution, but after commending their
zeal and encouraging them he proceeded to cross the sea, as he
expresses it in his Memoirs, to oppose fifteen hostile commanders at
the head of four hundred and fifty cohorts.[267] The deity gave him
sure prognostics of success; for upon his sacrificing immediately on
landing in Italy near Tarentum, the liver of the animal was found to
have on it the figure of a crown[268] of bay with two ribands attached
to it. A short time also before he crossed the sea, two large he-goats
were seen in Campania near Mount Hephæus, in the daytime, fighting,
and in all respects acting like men engaged in a contest. But it was
only a vision, and it gradually rose up from the ground and dispersed
in the air in various directions like dark phantoms, and finally
disappeared. No long time after, in this very spot, when the younger
Marius and the consul Norbanus[269] came upon him at the head of a
large force, Sulla, without having time to form his battle or to
dispose his companies, but merely availing himself of the spirit that
animated all his men, and their impetuous courage, put to flight his
opponents, and shut Norbanus up in Capua with the loss of seven
thousand of his soldiers. It was this success, as some say, which
prevented his soldiers from dispersing to their several cities, and
encouraged them to stay with Sulla and to despise their opponents,
though many times more numerous than themselves. At Silvium,[270] as
Sulla says, a slave of one Pontius, moved by a divine impulse, met him
and declared that he brought from Bellona assurance of superiority in
war and victory, but that if he did not make haste the Capitol would
be burnt; and this is said to have happened on the very day which the
man foretold, being the day before the Nones of Quintilis, which we
now call July. Further, Marcus Lucullus, one of Sulla's commanders,
was opposed at Fidentia[271] with sixteen cohorts to fifty of the
enemy, and though he had confidence in the spirit of his men, he was
discouraged because a greater part of them were unarmed. While he was
considering and hesitating what to do, a gentle breeze blowing from
the adjoining plain, which was covered with grass, carried many of the
flowers to the army of Lucullus, and spontaneously strewed them about,
so that they rested and fell on the men's shields and helmets, which
seemed to their opponents to be crowned with chaplets. Thus
encouraged, the soldiers of Lucullus engaged, and gained a victory,
with the loss to the opposite party of eighteen thousand men and their
camp. This Lucullus was the brother of the Lucullus who afterwards
defeated Mithridates and Tigranes.

XXVIII. Sulla, perceiving that he was still surrounded by many hostile
camps and large forces, treacherously invited Scipio[272] one of the
consuls, to come to terms. Scipio accepted the proposal, which was
followed by many meetings and conferences, but Sulla continually threw
impediments and pretexts in the way of a final agreement, and in the
mean time he corrupted Scipio's soldiers by means of his own men, who
were as practised in all kinds of deceit and fraud as their commander.
Going within the intrenchments of Scipio and mingling with his
soldiers, they gained over some by giving them, money, others by
promises, and the rest by flattery and persuasion. At last Sulla with
twenty cohorts approached the camp of Scipio, and his soldiers saluted
those of Scipio, who returned the salute and came over to them.
Scipio, thus deserted, was taken prisoner in his tent, but set at
liberty; and Sulla with the twenty cohorts, like so many tame birds,
having entrapped forty of the enemy, led them all back to his camp. On
this occasion, it is said, Carbo observed that he had to contend in
Sulla both with a lion and a fox, but the fox gave him most trouble.
After this, in the neighbourhood of Signia,[273] Marius at the head of
eighty-four cohorts challenged Sulla to battle; and Sulla was very
ready for the contest on that day, for he happened to have had a
vision in his sleep of this sort:--He dreamed that the elder Marius,
who had long been dead, was advising his son to beware of the
following day, as it would bring him heavy misfortune. This was the
reason that Sulla was eager to fight, and he sent for Dolabella,[274]
who was encamped at some distance. But as the enemy occupied the roads
and cut off the communications, the soldiers of Sulla were wearied
with fighting and working at the roads at the same time; and it
happened that much rain also fell, and added to the fatigue of their
labour. Upon this, the centurions coming up to Sulla, begged him to
defer the battle, and pointed out to him that the soldiers were
exhausted by fatigue and were lying on the ground with their shields
under them. Sulla consented unwillingly, and gave orders for the army
to halt there; but while they were beginning to throw up their rampart
and dig their trenches, Marius advanced against them confidently at
the head of his troops, expecting to disperse them in their state of
disorder and confusion. Now the dæmon made good the words that Sulla
heard in his dream; for his soldiers, transported with indignation and
stopping their work, fixed their spears in the ground close to the
trenches, and drawing their swords with a loud shout, were forthwith
at close quarters with the enemy. The soldiers of Marius did not stand
their ground long, and there was a great slaughter of them in their
flight. Marius, who fled to Præneste,[275] found the gates closed, but
a rope being let down from the walls, he fastened himself to it, and
was drawn up into the city. Some historians say, and Fenestella[276]
among them, that Marius saw nothing of the battle, but that being
exhausted by want of sleep and fatigue he lay down on the ground in
the shade, and as soon as the signal was given for battle, fell
asleep, and that he was roused with difficulty when the flight began.
Sulla says that he lost only twenty-three men in this battle, and that
he killed of the enemy twenty thousand, and took eight thousand alive.
He was equally successful everywhere else through his generals
Pompeius,[277] Crassus, Metellus, Servilius; for without sustaining
any but the most trifling loss, they destroyed the great armies of
their opponents, and at last Carbo,[278] who was the main support of
the opposite party, stole away from his troops by night and sailed to
Libya.

XXIX. In the last struggle, however, like a fresh combatant attacking
an exhausted athlete, Telesinus the Samnite was very near tripping up
Sulla and laying him prostrate at the gates of Rome. Telesinus was
hastening with Lamponius the Lucanian and a strong force to Præneste,
in order to rescue Marius, who was besieged; but finding that Sulla in
his front and Pompeius in his rear were coming against him, and that
he could neither advance nor retreat, like a brave and experienced man
he broke up his encampment by night and marched with all his force
against Rome. And indeed he was very near surprising the city, which
was unguarded; however, halting about ten stadia from the Colline
gate, he passed the night there, full of confidence and elated with
hope, as he had got the advantage over so many great generals. At
daybreak the most distinguished young men came out on horseback to
oppose him, but many of them fell, and among them Claudius
Appius,[279] a man of noble rank and good character. This naturally
caused confusion in the city, and there were women shrieking and
people hurrying in all directions, in expectation that the city was
going to be stormed, when Balbus appeared first, coming at full speed
from Sulla with seven hundred horsemen. Balbus just halted long enough
to allow his men to dry the sweat from their horses: then bridling
them again, they advanced quickly and engaged with the enemy. In the
mean time Sulla also appeared, and ordering the advanced ranks to take
some refreshment, he began to put them in order of battle. Dolabella
and Torquatus earnestly entreated him to pause, and not to put all to
the hazard with his exhausted soldiers; they said, the contest was not
with Carbo and Marius, but with Samnites and Lucanians, the most
deadly and warlike enemies of Rome: but Sulla, without paying any
regard to them, ordered the trumpets to sound the charge, though it
was now about the tenth hour. The battle began, and was fiercer than
any that was fought in this campaign. The right wing, where Crassus
commanded, was completely successful; but the left was hard pressed,
and in a dangerous plight, when Sulla came to its support mounted on a
very spirited and fleet white horse, by which he was easily
distinguished from the rest, and two of the enemy's soldiers, fixing
their javelins, prepared to aim at him, Sulla did not see them, but
his groom whipped the horse, which just carried his rider so far out
of the reach of the spears that they passed close to the horse's tail,
and stuck in the ground. It is said that Sulla always carried about
with him in his bosom, in battle, a small golden figure of Apollo,
which he got from Delphi, and that he then kissed it, and said, "O
Pythian Apollo, after raising the fortunate Sulla Cornelius in so many
contests to glory and renown, wilt thou throw him prostrate here, at
the gates of his native city, and so bring him to perish most ignobly
with his fellow-citizens?" After this address to the god it is said
that Sulla entreated some, and threatened and laid hold of others; but
at last, the left wing being completely broken, he was mingled with
the fugitives and made his escape to the camp with the loss of many of
his friends and men of note. Not a few of the citizens also, who had
come to see the fight, were killed and trampled down, so that it was
thought all was over with the city, and the blockade of Marius was all
but raised, for many of the fugitives made their way to Præneste, and
urged Ofella Lucretius,[280] who had been appointed to conduct the
siege, to break up his quarters with speed, as Sulla was killed, and
Rome in the possession of the enemy.

XXX. It was now far on in the night when men came to Sulla's camp from
Crassus to get something to eat for him and his soldiers, for after
putting the enemy to flight they had pursued them to Antemnæ,[281] and
there encamped. Upon this intelligence, and that most of the enemy
were killed, Sulla came to Antemnæ at daybreak. Here three thousand
soldiers sent to him to propose to surrender, and Sulla promised them
their lives if they would punish the rest of his enemies before they
joined him. Trusting to his promise, these men attacked their
comrades, and a great number on both sides were cut to pieces.
However, Sulla got together the soldiers who had offered to surrender
and those who had survived the massacre, to the number of six
thousand, in the Circus,[282] and at the same time he summoned the
Senate to the temple of Bellona. As soon as he began to speak, the
men who were appointed to do the work began to cut down the six
thousand men. A cry naturally arose from so many men being butchered
in a narrow space, and the Senators were startled; but Sulla
preserving the same unmoved expression of countenance, bade them
attend to what he was saying, and not trouble themselves about what
was going on outside; it was only some villains who were being
punished by his orders. This made even the dullest Roman see that
there was merely an exchange of tyrants, not a total change. Now
Marius was always cruel, and he grew more so, and the possession of
power did not change his disposition. But Sulla at first used his
fortune with moderation and like a citizen of a free state, and he got
the reputation of being a leader who, though attached to the
aristocratical party, still regarded the interests of the people;
besides this, he was from his youth fond of mirth, and so soft to pity
as to be easily moved to tears. It was not without reason, then, that
his subsequent conduct fixed on the possession of great power the
imputation that it does not let men's tempers abide by their original
habits, but makes them violent, vain, and inhuman. Now whether
fortune really produces an alteration and change in a man's natural
disposition, or whether, when he gets to power, his bad qualities
hitherto concealed are merely unveiled, is a matter that belongs to
another subject than the present.

XXXI. Sulla now began to make blood flow, and he filled the city with
deaths without number or limit; many persons were murdered on grounds
of private enmity, who had never had anything to do with Sulla, but he
consented to their death to please his adherents. At last a young man,
Caius Metellus, had the boldness to ask Sulla in the Senate-house,
when there would be an end to these miseries, and how far he would
proceed before they could hope to see them stop. "We are not
deprecating," he said, "your vengeance against those whom you have
determined to put out of the way, but we entreat you to relieve from
uncertainty those whom you have determined to spare." Sulla replied,
that he had not yet determined whom he would spare. "Tell us then,"
said Metellus, "whom you intend to punish." Sulla said that he would.
Some say that it was not Metellus, but Afidius,[283] one of Sulla's
flatterers, who made use of the last expression. Sulla immediately
proscribed eighty persons without communicating with any magistrate.
As this caused a general murmur, he let one day pass, and then
proscribed two hundred and twenty more, and again on the third day as
many. In an harangue to the people, he said, with reference to these
measures, that he had proscribed all he could think of, and as to
those who now escaped his memory, he would proscribe them at some
future time. It was part of the proscription[284] that every man who
received and protected a proscribed person should be put to death for
his humanity; and there was no exception for brothers, children, or
parents. The reward for killing a proscribed person was two talents,
whether it was a slave who killed his master or a son who killed his
father. But what was considered most unjust of all, he affixed infamy
on the sons and grandsons of the proscribed and confiscated their
property. The proscriptions were not confined to Rome; they extended
to every city of Italy: neither temple nor hospitable hearth nor
father's house was free from murder, but husbands were butchered in
the arms of their wives, and children in the embrace of their mothers.
The number of those who were massacred through revenge and hatred was
nothing compared with those who were murdered for their property. It
occurred even to the assassins to observe that the ruin of such a one
was due to his large house, another man owed his death to his orchard,
and another again to his warm baths. Quintus Aurelius, a man who
never meddled with public affairs, and though he was no further
concerned about all these calamities except so far as he sympathised
with the sufferings of others, happened to come to the Forum and there
he read the names of the proscribed. Finding his own name among them,
he exclaimed, Alas! wretch that I am; 'tis my farm at Alba that is my
persecutor. He had not gone far before he was murdered by some one who
was in search of him.

XXXII. In the mean time Marius killed himself to avoid being taken.
Sulla now went to Præneste,[285] and he began by examining the case of
each individual before he punished him; but having no time for this
inquiry, he had all the people brought to one spot, to the number of
twelve thousand, and ordered them to be massacred, with the exception
of one man, an old friend of his, whom he offered to pardon. But the
man nobly declared he would never owe his safety to the destroyer of
his country, and mingling with the rest of the citizens he was cut
down together with them. The affair of Lucius Catilina[286] was
perhaps the most monstrous of all. Lucius had murdered his brother
before the termination of the war, and he asked Sulla to proscribe him
among the rest as if he were still alive; which was done. To show his
gratitude, Catilina killed one Marcus Marius,[287] who belonged to the
opposite faction, and after bringing his head to Sulla, who was then
sitting in the Forum, he went to the temple of Apollo, which was close
by, and washed his hands in the sacred font.[288]

XXXIII. Besides the massacres, there were other things to cause
dissatisfaction. Sulla had himself proclaimed Dictator,[289] and thus
revived this office after an interval of one hundred and twenty years.
An act of indemnity was also passed for all that he had done; for the
future it was enacted that he should have power of life and death, and
should confiscate property, distribute lands, found colonies, destroy
them, take away kingdoms and give them to whom he pleased. The sales
of confiscated property were conducted by him from his tribunal in
such an arrogant and tyrannical manner, that his mode of dealing with
the produce of the sales was more intolerable than the seizure of the
property: he gave away to handsome women, players on the lyre, mimi
and worthless libertini, the lands of whole nations and the revenues
of cities; to some men he gave wives, who were compelled to marry
against their will. Wishing to form an alliance with Pompeius Magnus,
he made him put away his wife; and he took Æmilia, who was the
daughter of Scaurus and of his own wife Metella, from her husband
Manius Glabrio.[290] though she was then with child, and married her
to Pompeius. Æmilia died in the house of Pompeius in childbirth.
Lucretius Ofella,[291] who had taken Præneste, became a candidate for
the consulship, and canvassed for it. Sulla at first attempted to stop
him; but on Lucretius entering the Forum supported by a large party,
Sulla sent one of his centurions to kill Lucretius, himself the while
sitting on his tribunal in the temple of Castor and Pollux, and
looking down upon the murder. The bystanders seized the centurion and
brought him before the tribunal; but Sulla bidding them stop their
noise, declared that he had ordered the centurion to kill Lucretius,
and they must let him go.

XXXIV. The triumph[292] of Sulla was magnificent for the splendour and
rarity of the regal spoils; but the exiles formed a greater ornament
to it and a noble spectacle. The most illustrious and wealthy of the
citizens followed in the procession with chaplets on their heads,
calling Sulla their saviour and father, inasmuch as through him they
were restored to their country, their children, and their wives. When
the triumph was over, Sulla before the assembled people gave an
account of all the events of his life, mentioning with equal
particularity his good fortune and his great deeds, and in conclusion
he bade them salute him by the name of Eutyches,[293] for this is the
nearest word to express the Latin Felix: and when he wrote to Greeks
or had any business to transact with them, he called himself
Epaphroditus. In our country also, on the trophies of Sulla, there is
the inscription: Lucius Cornelius Sulla Epaphroditus. As Metella bore
him twins, Sulla named the male Faustus, and the female Fausta: for
the Romans apply the name Faustus to what is fortunate and gladsome.
Sulla indeed trusted so far to his good fortune rather than to his
acts, that, though he had put many persons to death, and had made so
many innovations and changes in the state, he laid down the
dictatorship,[294] and allowed the people to have the full control of
the consular elections, without going near them, and all the while
walking about in the Forum, and exposing himself to any one who might
choose to call him to account, just like a private person. Contrary to
Sulla's wish, a bold man, and an enemy of his, was likely to be
elected consul, Marcus Lepidus,[295] not for his own merits, but
because the people wished to please Pompeius, who was earnest in his
support and canvassed for him. Sulla seeing Pompeius going home well
pleased with his victory, called him to him and said: "What a fine
piece of policy is this of yours, young man, for Lepidus to be
proclaimed consul before Catulus, the most violent in preference to
the most honourable of men! It is, however, time for you not to be
asleep, as you have strengthened your rival against yourself." Sulla
said this in a kind of prophetic tone, for Lepidus soon broke out in
great excesses, and was at war with Pompeius.

XXXV. Sulla made an offering of the tenth part of his substance to
Hercules, and feasted the people magnificently: so much greater indeed
was the preparation than what was required, that a great quantity of
provisions was daily thrown into the river, and wine was drunk forty
years old, and even older. In the midst of the entertainment, which
lasted several days, Metella died. As the priests would not allow
Sulla to go to her, or his house to be polluted by a dead body, Sulla
sent Metella a writing of divorce, and ordered her, while still alive,
to be removed from his house to another. So far he observed the custom
strictly through superstition; but the law which limited the cost of
funerals, though he had proposed it himself, he violated by sparing no
expense. He also violated his own laws for diminishing the cost of
entertainments, endeavouring to forget his grief in extravagant
drinking and feasting, and in the company of buffoons. A few months
after his wife's death there was a show of gladiators. As there was
yet no distinction of places,[296] but men and women sat promiscuously
in the theatre, it chanced that a woman seated herself near Sulla who
was very handsome and of good family; she was a daughter of Messala,
and sister of the orator Hortensius: her name was Valeria,[297] and
she had lately separated from her husband. This woman, going behind
Sulla, placed her hand upon him, and pulling a thread out of his
dress, returned to her place. As Sulla looked on her with some
surprise, she said, No mischief, Imperator;[298] I also wish to have a
bit of your good fortune. Sulla was not displeased at her words, and
it was soon plain that he had conceived a passion for the woman; for
he privately sent to ask her name, and made himself acquainted with
her family and her mode of life. After this there were interchanges of
glances, and frequent side-looks, and giving and returning of smiles,
and, finally, treaties and arrangements about marriage, all which on
her part perhaps deserved no censure; but as to Sulla, however chaste
and reputable the woman might be that he married, it was no reputable
or decent matter that induced him to it, for he was caught like a
young man by mere looks and wanton airs, the nature of which is to
excite the most depraved and impure feelings.

XXXVII. Sulla foresaw his end, and even in a manner wrote about it,
for he finished the twenty-second book of his Memoirs only two days
before his death. He there says, that the Chaldæans foretold him that
it was his fate to die, after a happy life, at the very height of his
prosperity; he says also that his son, who had died a short time
before Metella, appeared to him in a dream, in a mean dress, and
standing by him, entreated his father to rest from his troubles and to
go with him to join his mother Metella, and live with her in ease and
quiet. Yet he did not give up attending to public matters. Ten days
before his death he restored tranquillity among the people of
Dicæarchia,[302] who were in a state of civil commotion, and he drew
up for them a constitution; and only one day before his death, hearing
that the chief magistrate Granius was a public defaulter and refused
to pay the debt, waiting for Sulla's death, Sulla sent for the man to
his chamber, and surrounding him with his slaves ordered him to be
strangled; but with his shouting and efforts he burst an imposthume
and vomited a quantity of blood. Upon this his strength failed him and
he got through the night with difficulty. He left two infant children
by Metella; Valeria, after his death, brought forth a daughter, whom
they called Postuma,[303] for this is the name that the Romans give to
children who are born after their father's death.

XXXVIII. Now many flocked to Lepidus and combined with him to prevent
the body of Sulla from receiving the usual interment. But Pompeius,
though he had ground of complaint against Sulla, for he was the only
friend whom Sulla had passed over in his will,[304] turning some from
their purpose by his influence and entreaties, and others by threats,
had the body conveyed to Rome, and secured it a safe and honourable
interment. It is said that the women contributed so great a quantity
of aromatics for Sulla's funeral,[305] that without including what was
conveyed in two hundred and ten litters, there was enough to make a
large figure of Sulla, and also to make a lictor out of costly
frankincense and cinnamon. The day was cloudy in the morning, and as
rain was expected they did not bring the body out till the ninth hour.
However, a strong wind came down on the funeral pile and raised a
great flame, and they had just time to collect the ashes as the pile
was sinking and the fire going out, when a heavy rain poured down and
lasted till night; so Sulla's good fortune seemed to follow him to his
funeral, and to stay with him to the last. His monument is in the
Campus Martius. The inscription, which they say he wrote and left
behind him, says in substance, that none of his friends ever did him a
kindness, and none of his enemies ever did him a wrong, without being
fully repaid.

FOOTNOTES:

The origin of the word Sulla is uncertain. This Sulla was not the
first who bore it. P. Cornelius Rufinus, Prætor B.C. 212, the
grandfather of this Sulla, also bore the name. The various conjectures
on the origin of the name Sulla are given by Drumann, _Geschichte
Roms_, ii. p. 426. The name should be written Sulla, not Sylla. The
coins have always Sulla or Sula. (Rasche, _Lex Rei Numariæ_; Eckhel,
_Doctrina Num. Vet._ v. 189.) L. Cornelius Sulla was the son of L.
Cornelius Sulla, and born B.C. 138.]

[Footnote 163: P. Cornelius Rufinus was consul B.C. 290. He was also
Dictator, but in what year is uncertain. He was ejected from the
Senate by the Censor C. Fabricius B.C. 275 for violating one of the
sumptuary laws of Rome, or those which limited expense. The story is
mentioned by Gellius (iv. 8; xvii. 21). Plutarch has translated the
Latin word Libræ by the Greek Litræ.

The Romans made many enactments for limiting expense in dress,
entertainments, funerals (Sulla, c. 35), amount of debt to be
incurred, and so forth, all of which were unavailing. The notion of
regulating private expenditure was not peculiar to the Romans among
the states of antiquity; and our own legislation, which in its absurd
as well as its best parts has generally some parallel in that of the
Romans, contains many instances of sumptuary laws, which prescribed
what kind of dress, and of what quality, should be worn by particular
classes, and so forth. The English Sumptuary Statutes relating to
Apparel commenced with the 37th of Edward III. This statute, after
declaring that the outrageous and excessive apparel of divers people
against their estate and degree is the destruction and impoverishment
of the land, prescribes the apparel of the various classes into which
it distributes the people; but it goes no higher than knights. The
clothing of the women and children is also regulated. The next
statute, 3rd of Edward IV., is very minute. This kind of
statute-making went on at intervals to the 1st of Philip & Mary, when
an Act was passed for the Reformation of Excessive Apparel. These
Apparel Statutes were repealed by the 1st of James I.]

]

[Footnote 172: The exhibition of wild animals in the Roman games was
now become a fashion. In the latter part of the Republic it was
carried to an enormous extent: the elephant, the rhinocerous, the
lion, and other wild animals, were brought from Africa to Rome for
these occasions. When Sulla was prætor B.C. 93, he exhibited one
hundred lions in the Circus, which were let loose and shot with arrows
by archers whom King Bocchus sent for the purpose. (Plinius, _N.H._
viii. 16, Seneca, _De Brevitate Vitæ_, c. 13.) There was an old decree
of the Senate which prohibited the importation of African wild beasts,
but it was repealed by a measure proposed by the tribune Cn. Aufidius
so far as to render the importation legal for the games of the Circus.

Plutarch speaks of Sulla as immediately canvassing for the prætorship
after his return to Rome. The dates show that at least several years
elapsed before he succeeded.]

[Footnote 173: Probably Sextus Julius Cæsar, consul B.C. 91, and the
uncle of the Dictator, C. Julius Cæsar.]

[Footnote 174: Ariobarzanes I. called Philoromæus, or a lover of the
Romans, was elected king of Cappadocia B.C. 93, but he was soon
expelled by Tigranes, king of Armenia, the son-in-law of Mithridates.
Ariobarzanes applied for help to the Romans, and he was restored by
Sulla B.C. 92. He was driven out several times after, and again
restored by the Romans.]

[Footnote 175: The name is written Mithradates on the Greek coins. The
word Mithradates occurs in various shapes in the Greek writers; and it
was a common name among the Medes and Persians. The first part of the
name (Mithra) is probably the Persian name Mitra or Mithra, the Sun.
This Mithridates is Mithradates the Sixth, king of Pontus in Asia, who
succeeded his father Mithridates V. B.C. 120, when he was about eleven
years of age. He was a man of ability, well instructed in the learning
of the Greeks, and a great linguist: it is said that he could speak
twenty-two languages. He had already got possession of Colchis on the
Black Sea, and placed one of his sons on the throne of Cappadocia. He
had also strengthened himself by marrying his daughter to Tigranes
king of Armenia. Other events in his life are noticed in various parts
of the Lives of Sulla, Lucullus, and Pompeius. (See _Penny
Cyclopædia_, "Mithridates VI.")]

[Footnote 176: This name was common to a series of Armenian, and to a
series of Parthian kings. One Arsaces is considered to be the founder
of the dynasty of the Parthian kings, which dynasty the Greeks and
Romans call that of the Arsacidæ. This Arsaces is reckoned the ninth
in the series, and was the son and successor of Arsaces the Eighth. He
is placed in the series of Parthian kings as Arsaces IX. Mithridates
II. (On the series of Parthian Arsacidæ, see "Arsaces," in _Biograph.
Dictionary_ of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge.)
From the time of this interview of Sulla to a late period under the
Roman Empire, the Romans and Parthians were sometimes friends, oftener
enemies. No name occurs so frequently among the Roman writers of the
Augustan period as that of the Parthians, the most formidable enemy
that the Romans encountered in Asia, and who stopped their victorious
progress in the East.]

[Footnote 177: The MSS. have "a native of Chalkis" ([Greek:
Chalkideus] Χαλκιδεύς), a manifest blunder, which has long since been
corrected.]

[Footnote 178: Censorinus was a family name of the Marcii. This
appears to be C. Censorinus, whom Cicero (_Brutus_, c. 67) speaks of
as moderately versed in Greek Literature. He lost his life in the wars
of Sulla B.C. 81.]

[Footnote 179: Timotheus distinguished himself during the period of
the decline of the power of Athens. In the year B.C. 357 he and
Iphicrates were sent with a fleet to reduce to obedience the Athenian
subject states and especially the island of Samos. The expedition was
unsuccessful, and Timotheus and other generals were brought to trial
on their return home. Timotheus was convicted, and sentenced to pay a
heavy fine, but as he was unable to pay it, he withdrew to Chalkis in
Eubœa, where he died B.C. 354. (_Penny Cyclopædia_, art. "Timotheus.")
This story of the painting is told by Ælianus, _Var. Hist._ xiii. 43.]

This note does not apply to any particular case, when dæmons are
mentioned by Plutarch, but to all cases where he speaks of dæmons,
divination, dreams, and other signs.]

[Footnote 182: Quintus Cæcilius Metellus Pius, the son of Metellus
Numidicus, was consul with Sulla in his second consulship B.C. 80.]

[Footnote 183: The place is unknown, unless it be the place near the
altar of Laverna, the goddess of thieves, which was near the Porta
Lavernalis, as Varro says (_Ling. Lat._ v. 163). Horatius (1 _Ep._
xvi. 60) represents the rogue as putting up a prayer "to the Fair
Laverna," that he may appear to be what he is not, an honest man, and
that night and darkness may kindly cover his sins. The phænomenon
which Sulla describes appears to have been of a volcanic character;
and if so, it is the most recent on record within the volcanic region
of the Seven Hills.]

[Footnote 184: Apparently Aulus Postumius Albinus, who was consul with
Marcus Antonius B.C. 99. Valerius Maximus tells the story (ix. 8, 3).]

[Footnote 185: This was Sulla'a first consulship, B.C. 88. If he was
now fifty, he was born B.C. 138. His colleague was Quintus Pompeius
Rufus, who was killed in this same year at the instigation or at least
with the approbation of Cn. Pompeius Strabo, the father of Pompeius
Magnus. (Appian, _Civil Wars_, i. 63.)]

[Footnote 186: Cæcilia Metella was the fourth wife of Sulla. The other
three are mentioned in this chapter. Ilia is perhaps a mistake for
Julia. Sulla's fifth and last wife was Valeria, c. 35.]

[Footnote 187: Drumann (_Geschichte Roms_, Cæcilii) has shown that
Plutarch is mistaken in supposing Cæcilia to be the daughter of
Metellus Pius, who was consul with Sulla B.C. 80. She was the daughter
of L. Metellus Dalmaticus, who was the brother of Metellus Numidicus
and the uncle of Metellus Pius. Her first husband was M. Scaurus,
consul B.C. 115, by whom she had several children, and among them the
Scaurus whom Cicero defended. Metella had children by Sulla also. (See
c. 36, notes.)]

[Footnote 188: The historian of Rome. These events belonged to the
seventy-seventh book of Livius, which is lost. The Epitome shows what
this book contained.]

[Footnote 189: This word occurs three times in this chapter. In the
first instance, the word is _the dæmonium_; in the second it is _the
god_ ([Greek: ho theos] ὁ θεός); in the third, it is _the dæmonium_
again.]

[Footnote 190: The Senate often met in the temple of Duellona or
Bellona, the goddess of War. Duellona and Bellona are the same.
Compare the Bacchanalian Inscription, and Livius (28, c. 9, &c.).

The last sentence of this chapter is corrupt, and the precise meaning
is uncertain.]

[Footnote 194: Plutarch here uses the same word ([Greek: apraxiai]
ἀπράξιαι) which I have elsewhere translated by the Roman word
Justitium. (Marius, c. 35.)]

[Footnote 195: Appian (_Civil Wars_, i. 57) says that all Sulla's
officers left him, when he was going to march to Rome, except one
quæstor. They would not serve against their country.]

[Footnote 196: That is Moon, Athena (Minerva), and Enyo (Bellona). It
is difficult to conjecture what Cappadocian goddess Plutarch means, if
it be not the Great Mother. (Marius, c. 17.)]

[Footnote 198: The Roman word is Tellus. (Livius, 2, c. 41.) The
temple was built on the ground occupied by the house of Spurius
Cassius, which was pulled down after his condemnation. (Livius, 2, c.
41.)]

[Footnote 199: Appian (_Civil Wars_, i. 60) mentions the names of
twelve persons who were proscribed. The attempt to rouse the slaves to
rebellion was one of the grounds of this condemnation, and a valid
ground.]

[Footnote 200: L. Cornelius Cinna and Cn. Octavius were consuls B.C.
87. the year in which Sulla left Italy to fight with Mithridates.
Apuleius (_On the God of Sokrates_) thus alludes to the kind of oath
which Cinna took--"Shall I swear by Jupiter, holding a stone in my
hand, after the most ancient manner of the Romans? But if the opinion
of Plato is true, that God never mingles himself with man, a stone
will hear me more easily than Jupiter. This however is not true: for
Plato will answer for his opinion by my voice. I do not, says he,
assert that the gods are separated and alienated from us, so as to
think that not even our prayers reach them; for I do not remove them
from an attention to, but only from a contact with human affairs."]

[Footnote 201: Appian (_Civil Wars_, i. 63, 64) gives another reason.
Sulla was alarmed at the assassination of his colleague Quintus
Pompeius Rufus, and left Rome by night for Capua, whence he set out
for Greece.]

[Footnote 202: This was the country on the west coast of Asia Minor,
of which the Romans had formed the province of Asia. Mithridates took
advantage of the Romans being busied at home with domestic troubles to
advance his interests in Asia, where he was well received by the
people, who were disgusted with the conduct of the Roman governors. He
had defeated the Roman generals L. Cassius, Manius Aquilius, and Q.
Oppius. (Appian, _Mithridatic War_, c. 17, &c.) He also ordered all
the Romans and Italians who were in Asia, with their wives and
children, to be murdered on one day; which was done.]

[Footnote 213: The history of this ancient body cannot be given with
any accuracy except in detail. (See the article "Amphictyons," _Penny
Cyclopædia_.) The "royal presents" were the gifts of Crœsus, king of
Lydia (in the sixth century B.C.) the most munificent of all the
donors to the temple. Among his other presents Herodotus (i. 51)
mentions four of these silver casks or jars, and he uses the same word
that Plutarch does. The other three had probably been taken by some
previous plunderer. In the Sacred war (B.C. 357) the Phokians under
Philomelus took a large part of the valuable things at Delphi for the
purpose of paying their troops. (Diodorus, xvi. 30.)]

[Footnote 214: Flamininus, whose life Plutarch has written under the
name of Flaminius, defeated Philip V. king of Macedonia B.C. 197.
Manius Acilius Glabrio, who was consul B.C. 191, defeated in that year
Antiochus III. king of Syria, commonly called the Great, at Thermopylæ
in Greece. Antiochus afterwards withdrew into Asia. Æmilius Paulus
defeated Perseus, the last king of Macedonia, at Pydna B.C. 168, upon
which Macedonia was reduced into the form of a Roman Province (Livius,
45, c. 18.). Plutarch has written the Life of Paulus Æmilius.]

[Footnote 215: See the Life of Marius, c. 42.]

[Footnote 216: See c. 20, 21. C. Flavius Fimbria was the legatus of
the consul L. Valerius Flaccus. Cicero (_Brutus_, 66) calls him a
madman.]

[Footnote 217: The Medimnus was a dry measure, reckoned at 11 gallons
7.1456 pints English. It was equivalent to six Roman modii. (Smith's
_Dictionary of Antiquities_.)]

[Footnote 218: This plant may have had its name from the virgin
(parthenos) goddess Athene, whom the Romans call Minerva. Plinius
(_N.H. 22_, c. 20) has described it. It is identified with the modern
feverfew by Smith in Rees' _Cyclopædia_,--a plant of the chamomile
kind; rather unpleasant for food, as one might conjecture. The
oil-flasks were of coarse leather. In Herodotus (ix. 118) we read of a
besieged people eating their bedcords, which we may assume to have
been strips of hides, or leather at least.]

[Footnote 219: For all matters relating to the topography of Rome and
Athens, the reader must consult a plan: nothing else can explain the
text. The gate called Dipylum or Double-Gate was the passage from the
Keramicus within the walls to the Keramicus outside of the walls on
the north-west side of Athens.]

[Footnote 220: Teius is not a Roman name. It is conjectured that it
should be Ateius.]

[Footnote 222: A Greek Agora corresponds to a Roman Forum.]

[Footnote 223: The description of the capture of Athens is given by
Appian. (_Mithridatic War_, c. 30.) Plutarch here alludes to the
deluge in the time of Deucalion, which is often mentioned by the Greek
and Roman writers. In the time of Pausanias (i. 18), in the second
century of our æra, they still showed at Athens the hole through which
the waters of the deluge ran off. A map of the Topography of Athens
has been published by the Society for the Diffusion of Useful
Knowledge. Leake's _Topography of Athens_, K.O. Müller, in Ersch und
Gruber, _Encyclop._ art. "Attika," p. 223, and P.W. Forchhammer,
_Topographie von Athen_, 1841, should be consulted.]

[Footnote 224: See Strabo, p. 395.]

[Footnote 232: "Our city" will explain why Plutarch has described the
campaign in the plains of Bœotia at such length. Plutarch's battles
are none of the best; and he has done well in making them generally
short.]

[Footnote 233: The cave of Trophonius was at Lebadeia in Bœotia.
Pausanias (ix. 39) has given a full account of the singular ceremonies
used on consulting the deity.]

[Footnote 234: The word is [Greek: omphês] ὀμφῆς, literally "voice,"
which has caused a difficulty to the translators; but the reading is
probably right.]

[Footnote 235: This was Lucius Licinius Murena, who conducted the war
against Mithridates in Asia B.C. 83 as Proprætor. He was the father of
the Lucius Murena in whose defence we have an extant oration of
Cicero.]

[Footnote 236: The old story is well told by Ovidius (_Metamorphoses,_
iii. 14, &c.)]

[Footnote 244: This stream is called Morius (c. 17). Pausanias, who
made his tour through Greece in the first half of the second century
of our æra, saw the trophies (ix. 40).]

[Footnote 245: L. Valerius Flaccus was elected consul B.C. 86 in the
place of C. Marius, who died at the beginning of the year.]

[Footnote 246: The name given by the Greeks and Romans to that part of
the Mediterranean which lay between Dyrrachium (Durazzo) and the
opposite coast of Italy. Thucydides (i. 24) makes the Ionian Sea
commence about Epidamnus (which was the old name of Dyrrachium), and
probably he extended the name to all the Adriatic or modern Gulf of
Venice.]

[Footnote 250: If we assume that it was exactly two hundred years,
Plutarch wrote this passage about A.D. 114, in the reign of Trajanus.
This battle was fought B.C. 86. Hadrianus became emperor A.D. 117.
(See Preface, p. xiv.)]

[Footnote 251: Cn. Papirius Carbo was the colleague of Cinna in the
consulship B.C. 85 and 84.]

[Footnote 252: A Deliac merchant This might be a merchant of Delium,
the small town in Bœotia, on the Euripus, where Sulla and Archelaus
met. But Delos, a small rocky island, one of the Cyclades, is probably
meant Delos was at this time a great slave-market. (Strabo, p. 668.)]

[Footnote 256: Mædike appears to be the right name. Thucydides (ii.
98) calls the people Mædi: they were a Thracian people. Compare Strabo
(p. 316). Appian (_Mithridat. War_, c. 55) speaks of this expedition
as directed aguinst the Sinti, who wore neighbours of the Mædi, and
other nations which bordered on Macedonia, and annoyed it by their
predatory incursions. Sulla thus kept his soldiers employed, which was
the practice of all prudent Roman commanders, and enriched them with
booty at the same time.]

[Footnote 257: This is the old town called Krenides, or the Little
Springs, which King Philippus, the father of Alexander the Great,
restored and gave his name to. It was near Amphipolis on the river
Strymon. (See Life of Brutus, c. 38.)]

[Footnote 258: The Troad is the north-west angle of Asia Minor, which
borders on the Hellespont and the Ægean Sea (the Archipelago). The
name of the district, Troas in Greek, is from the old town of Troja.
Strabo (lib. xiii.) gives a particular description of this tract.

Sulla left L. Lucullus behind him to collect the money. (See Life of
Lucullus, c. 4.) The story of Fimbria in Appian (_Mithridat. War_, c.
69, 70) differs from that of Plutarch in some respects, but it is near
enough to show that though these two writers apparently followed
different authorities, Plutarch has given the facts substantially
correct.

When Sulla was within two stadia of Fimbria, he sent him orders to
give up the army, which he was illegally commanding. Fimbria sent back
an insulting message to the effect that Sulla also had no right to the
command which he held. While Sulla was throwing up his intrenchments,
and many of Fimbria's soldiers were openly leaving him, Fimbria
summoned those who still remained to a meeting, and urged them to stay
with him. Upon the soldiers saying that they would not fight against
their fellow-citizens, Fimbria tore his dress, and began to intreat
them severally. But the soldiers turned a deaf ear to him, and the
desertions became still more numerous, on which Fimbria went round to
the tents of the officers, and bribing some of them, he called another
meeting, and commanded the soldiers to take the oath to him. As those
who were hired by him called out that he ought to summon the men by
name to take the oath, he called by the crier those who had received
favours from him, and he called Nonius first who had been his partner
in everything. Nonius refused to take the oath, and Fimbria drew his
sword and threatened to kill him, but as there was a general shout, he
became alarmed and desisted. However he induced a slave by money and
the promise of his freedom to go to Sulla as a deserter, and to
attempt his life. The man as he came near the act was alarmed, and
this gave rise to suspicion, which led to his being seized, and he
confessed. The army of Sulla, full of indignation and contempt,
surrounded the camp of Fimbria, and abused him, calling him Athenion,
which was the name of the fellow who put himself at the head of the
rebel runaway slaves in Sicily, and was a king for a few days. Fimbria
now despairing came to the rampart, and invited Sulla to a conference.
But Sulla sent Rutilius; and this first of all annoyed Fimbria, as he
was not honoured with a meeting, which is granted even to enemies. On
his asking for pardon for any error that he might have committed,
being still a young man, Rutilius promised that Sulla would allow him
to pass safe to the coast, if he would sail away from Asia, of which
Sulla was proconsul. Fimbria replied that he had better means than
that, and going to Pergamum and entering the temple of Æsculapius, he
pierced himself with his sword. As the wound was not mortal, he bade
his slave plunge the sword into his body. The slave killed his master,
and then killed himself on the body. Thus died Fimbria, who had done
much mischief to Asia after Mithridates. Sulla allowed Fimbria's
freedmen to bury their master; adding that he would not imitate Cinna
and Marius, who had condemned many persons to death at Rome, and also
refused to allow their bodies to be buried. The army of Fimbria now
came over to Sulla, and was received by him and united with his own.
Sulla also commissioned Curio to restore Nicomedes to Bithynia and
Ariobarzanes to Cappadocia, and he wrote to the Senate about all these
matters, pretending that he did not know that he had been declared an
enemy.]

[Footnote 259: Thyateira was a town in Lydia about 45 miles from
Pergamum.]

[Footnote 266: This phenomenon is mentioned by Strabo (p. 316), Dion
Cassius (41, c. 45), and Ælian (_Various History_, 13, c. 16). I do
not know if this spot has been examined by any modern traveller. It is
a matter of some interest to ascertain how long a phenomenon of this
kind has lasted. The pitch-springs of Zante (Zakynthus), which
Herodotus visited and describes (iv. 195), still produce the native
pitch. Strabo, who had not seen the Nymphæum, describes it thus after
the account of Poseidonius: "In the territory of Apollonia is a place
called the Nymphæum; it is a rock which sends forth fire, and at the
base of it are springs of warm asphaltus, the asphaltic earth, as it
appears, being in a state of combustion: and there is a mine of it
near on a hill. Whatever is cut out, is filled up again in course of
time, as the earth which is thrown into the excavations changes into
asphaltus, as Poseidonius says." We cannot conclude from this confused
description what the real nature of the phenomenon was. Probably the
asphaltus or bitumen was occasionally set on fire by the neighbouring
people. (See the art. "Asphaltum," _Penny Cyclopædia_.)]

[Footnote 267: The Cohors was the tenth part of a Roman Legion. Appian
(_Civil Wars_, i. 82) says that on this occasion the opponents of
Sulla made their cohorts contain 500 men each, so that a legion would
contain 5000 men. According to this estimate there were 90,000 men
under arms in Italy to oppose Sulla, who had five legions of Italian
soldiers, six thousand cavalry and some men from Peloponnesus and
Macedonia; in all forty thousand men. (Appian, _Civil Wars_, i. 79.)
Appian says that he had 1,600 ships.]

[Footnote 268: This passage is explained by the cut p. 287 in Smith's
_Dict. of Antiquities_, art. "Corona."]

[Footnote 269: Caius Junius Norbanus and L. Cornelius Scipio Asiaticus
were now consuls B.C. 83.]

[Footnote 270: Silvium is a town in Apulia on the Appian road, on the
Apennines. As to the burning of the Capitol, see Appian, _Civil Wars_,
i. 86.]

[Footnote 271: Fidentia was in North Italy not far from Placentia
(Piacenza): it is now Borgo San Donnino. Appian (_Civil Wars_, i. 92)
speaks of this battle near Placentia, which Lucullus gained over some
of Carbo's troops, not over Carbo himself, as is stated by some modern
writers. Carbo was now in Central Italy.]

[Footnote 272: Sulla, with Metellus Pius, who had joined him (Appian,
_Civil Wars_, i. 80), met L. Scipio near Teanum in Campania. Sertorius
was with Scipio. The circumstances are told by Appian (_Civil Wars_,
i. 86) as usual with more minuteness and very clearly. The main story
is correct in Plutarch.]

[Footnote 273: Signia, now Segni, is in the Volscian mountains, 35
miles south-east of Rome. It was a Roman colony as old us the reign of
Tarquinius Superbus, according to Livius (1, 55). This battle was
fought B.C. 82, when Cn. Papinus Carbo was consul for the third time
with the younger Marius. It appears that Sulla's progress towards Rome
was not very rapid. Appian (_Civil Wars_, i. 87) places the battle at
Sacriportus, the situation of which is unknown.]

[Footnote 274: Cn. Cornelius Dolabella was consul B.C. 81. He was
afterwards Proconsul of Macedonia, and had a triumph for his victories
over the Thracians and other barbarian tribes. C. Julius Cæsar, when a
young man (Cæsar, c. 4), prosecuted B.C. 77 Dolabella for
mal-administration in his province. Dolabella was acquitted.]

[Footnote 275: Præneste, now Palestrina. This strong town was about 20
miles E. by S. of Rome near the source of the Trerus, now the Sacco, a
branch of the Liris, the modern Garigliano.]

[Footnote 276: A Roman historian of the age of Augustus, who wrote
Annals, of which there were twenty-two books.]

[Footnote 277: These were Cn. Pompeius Magnus, who afterwards was the
great opponent of C. Julius Cæsar; his Life is written by Plutarch: M.
Licinius Crassus, called Dives or the Rich, whose Life is written by
Plutarch; Quintus Metellus Pius, the son of Metellus Numidicus; and P.
Servilius Vatia Isauricus, whom Sulla made consul B.C. 79, when he
declined the office himself.]

[Footnote 278: Carbo lost courage and ran away. He got safe to the
African coast, whence, with many men of rank, he made his way to
Sicily, and thence to the small island of Cossyra. Cn. Pompeius sent
men to seize him, who caught Carbo and his company: Carbo's followers
were immediately put to death pursuant to the orders of Pompeius.
Carbo was brought to Pompeius, and placed at his feet in chains; and
after Pompeius had insulted him who had thrice been consul by
pronouncing an harangue over him, Carbo was put to death, and his head
was sent to Sulla. (Appian, _Civil Wars_, i. 96.) The statement of
Plutarch (_Pompeius_, c. 10) agrees with that of Appian. These and
other acts of Pompeius should be remembered by those who are inclined
to pity his fate. He was probably under a necessity to put Carbo to
death pursuant to the orders of his muster Sulla, but the insult might
have been spared.]

[Footnote 279: It is uncertain who he was. See Drumann, _Geschichte
Roms_, ii. Claudii No. 26.]

[Footnote 280: See c. 33. Appian (_Civil Wars_, i. 93) gives a
different account of this affair before the Colline gate, but agrees
with Plutarch in stating that Sulla's right wing was successful and
the left was defeated. He says that Telesinus fell in the battle.]

[Footnote 281: Antemnæ was a few miles from Rome, near the junction of
the Tiber and the Anio (Teverone).]

[Footnote 282: Appian (_Civil Wars_, i. 93) briefly mentions this
massacre. It took place in the Circus Flaminius, which was near the
temple of Bellona.

Plutarch here starts a question which suggests itself to all men who
have had any experience. It is a common remark that a man who has been
raised from a low degree to a high station, or has become rich from
being poor, is no longer the same man. Nobody expects those whom he
has known in the same station as himself to behave themselves in the
same way when they are exalted above it. Nobody expects a man who has
got power to be the same man that he was in an humble station. Any man
who has lived a reasonable time in the world and had extensive
conversation with it knows this to be true. But is the man changed, or
are his latent qualities only made apparent by his changed
circumstances? The truth seems to be that latent qualities are
developed by opportunity. All men have the latent capacities of pride,
arrogance, tyranny, and cruelty. Cruelty perhaps requires the most
opportunities for its development; and these opportunities are power,
fear, and opposition to his will. It has been well observed, that all
men are capable of crime, but different circumstances are necessary to
develop this capacity in different men. All have their price; and some
may be bought cheap. He who is above the temptation of money may yield
to other temptations. The possession of power is the greatest
temptation of all, as it offers the greatest opportunities for the
development of any latent disposition; and every man has a point or
two in which he is open to the insidious attacks of opportunity. In
matters political, the main thing is to know, from the indications
that a man gives when he has not power, what he will be when he has
power: in the ordinary intercourse of life, the main thing is to judge
of the character of those with whom we deal by compulsion or choice,
to know how far we can trust what they say, how far their future
conduct may be predicted from present indications. But to show what
these indications are, belongs, as Plutarch says, to another inquiry
than the present. The general rule of old was Distrust, which the
crafty Sicilian, as Cicero (_Ad Attic._ i. 19) calls Epicharmus, was
always whispering in his ear. Epicharmus has well expressed his maxim
in a single line:

[Greek: Naphe kai memnas' apistein: arthra tauta ton phrenon.]
    Νᾶφε καὶ μέμνας' ἀπιστεῖν: άρθρα ταῦτα τῶν φρενῶν.

[Footnote 283: This is not a Roman name. The nearest name to it is
Aufidius. But it is conjectured that one Fufidius is meant here (see
the note of Sintenis), and also in the Life of Sertorius (c. 26, 27).
This is probably the Fufidius (Florus, iii. 21, where the name is
written incorrectly Furfidius in some editions) who said, that "Some
should be left alive that there might be persons to domineer over."]

[Footnote 284: A Proscriptio was a notice set up in some public place.
This Proscription of Sulla was the first instance of the kind, but it
was repeated at a later time. The first list of the proscribed,
according to Appian (_Civil Wars_, i, 55), contained forty senators
and about sixteen hundred equites. Sulla prefaced his proscription by
an address to the people, in which he promised to mend their
condition. Paterculus (ii. 28) states that the proscription was to the
following effect:--That the property of the proscribed should be sold,
that their children should be deprived of all title to their property,
and should be ineligible to public offices; and further, that the sons
of Senators should bear the burdens incident to their order and lose
all their rights. This will explain the word Infamy, which is used a
little below. Infamia among the Romans was not a punishment, but it
was a consequence of conviction for certain offences; and this
consequence was a civil disability; the person who became Infamis lost
his vote, and was ineligible to the great public offices. He also
sustained some disabilities in his private rights. Sulla therefore put
the children of the proscribed in the same condition as if they had
been found guilty of certain offences.

The consequence of these measures of Sulla was a great change of
property all through Italy. Cities which had favoured the opposite
faction were punished by the loss of their fortifications and heavy
requisitions, such as the French army in the Revolutionary wars levied
in Italy. Sulla settled the soldiers of twenty-three legions in the
Italian towns as so many garrisons, and he gave them lands and houses
by taking them from their owners. These were the men who stuck to
Sulla while he lived, and attempted to maintain his acts after his
death, for their title could only be defended by supporting his
measures. These are "the men of Sulla," as Cicero sometimes calls
them, whose lands were purchased by murder, and who, as he says
(_Contra Rullum_, ii. 26), were in such odium that their title could
not have stood a single attack of a true and courageous tribune.]

[Footnote 285: Appian (_Civil Wars_, i. 94) states that Sulla made all
the people in Præneste come out into the plain unarmed, that he picked
out those who had served him, who were very few, and these he spared.
The rest he divided into three bodies, Romans, Samnites, and
Prænestines: he told the Romans that they deserved to die, but he
pardoned them; the rest were massacred, with the exception of the
women and young children.]

[Footnote 286: L. Sergius Catilina, who formed a conspiracy in the
consulship of M. Tullius Cicero B.C. 63. (Life of Cicero.)]

[Footnote 287: Cn. Marius Gratidianus, the son of M. Gratidius of
Arpinum. He was adopted by one of the Marii; by the brother of Caius
Marius, as some conjecture.]

[Footnote 288: A vessel of stone or metal placed at the entrance of a
temple that those who entered might wash their hands in it, or perhaps
merely dip in a finger.]

[Footnote 289: Plutarch's expression is "he proclaimed himself
Dictator," but this expression is not to be taken literally, nor is it
to be supposed that Plutarch meant it to be taken literally. Sulla was
appointed in proper form, though he did in fact usurp the power, and
under the title of dictator was more than king. (Appian, _Civil Wars_,
i. 98.) The terms of Sulla's election were that he should hold the
office as long as he pleased; the disgrace of this compulsory election
was veiled under the declaration that Sulla was appointed to draw up
legislative measures and to settle affairs. Paterculus (ii. 28)
mentions the 120 years as having elapsed since the time of a previous
dictatorship, which was the year after Hannibal left Italy B.C. 202.
As Sulla was elected Dictator in B.C. 81, Plutarch's statement is
correct. (On the functions of the Dictator see Life of Cæsar, c. 37.)]

[Footnote 290: Manius Acilius Glabrio, who was prætor B.C. 70 during
the proceedings against Verres. He was the son of the M. Acilius
Glabrio who got a law passed on mal-administration in offices
(repetundæ), and the grandson of the Glabrio who defeated King
Antiochus near Thermopylæ. (See c. 12.)]

[Footnote 291: This murder is told more circumstantially by Appian
(_Civil Wars_, i. 101), who has added something that Plutarch should
not have omitted. After saying to the people that Lucretius had been
put to death by his order, Sulla told them a tale: "The lice were very
troublesome to a clown, as he was ploughing. Twice he stopped his
ploughing and purged his jacket. But he was still bitten, and in order
that he might not be hindered in his work, he burnt the jacket; and I
advise those who have been twice humbled not to make fire necessary
the third time."]

[Footnote 292: Plinius (_H.N._ 33, c. 5) speaks of this triumph: it
lasted two days. In the first day Sulla exhibited in the procession
15,000 pounds weight of gold and 115,000 pounds of silver, the produce
of his foreign victories: on the second, 13,000 pounds weight of gold
and 6000 pounds of silver which the younger Marius had carried off to
Præneste after the conflagration of the Capitol and from the robbery
of the other Roman temples.]

[Footnote 293: The term Felix appears on the coins of Sulla.
Epaphroditus signifies a favourite of Aphrodite or Venus. (Eckhel,
_Doctrina Num. Vet._ v. 190.) Eckhel infers from the guttus and lituus
on one of Sulla's coins that he was an Augur.]

[Footnote 294: Sulla abdicated the dictatorship B.C. 79 in the
consulship of P. Servilius Vatia Isauricus and Appius Claudius
Pulcher. Appian (_Civil Wars_, i. 103, &c.) speaks of the abdication.
He made no attempt to secure to his family the power that he had
acquired. It may be that he had no desire to perpetuate the power in
his family; and it is certain that this could not have been
accomplished. Sulla had only one son, and he was now a child. But it
is certainly a striking trait in this man's character that he
descended to a private station from the possession of unlimited power,
and after, as Appian observes, having caused the death of more than
one hundred thousand men in his Italian wars, besides ninety senators,
fifteen consuls, and two thousand six hundred equites, not to mention
those who were banished and whose property was confiscated, and the
many Italian cities whose fortifications he had destroyed and whose
lands and privileges he had taken away. Sulla's character was a
compound of arrogance, self-confidence, and contempt of all mankind,
which have seldom been united. But his ruling character was love of
sensual pleasures. He was weary of his life of turmoil, and he
returned to his property in the neighbourhood of Cumæ on the pleasant
shore of Campania, where he spent his time on the sea, in fishing, and
in sensual enjoyments. But he had nothing to fear; there were in Italy
one hundred and twenty thousand men who had served under him, to whom
he had given money and land; there was a great number of persons at
Rome who had shared in his cruelties and the profits of them, and
whose safely consisted in maintaining the safety of their leader.
Besides this, he had manumitted above ten thousand vigorous men, once
the slaves of masters who had been murdered by his orders, and made
them Roman citizens under the name of Cornelii. These men were always
in readiness to execute his orders. With these precautions, this
blood-stained man retired to enjoy the sensual gratifications that he
had indulged in from his youth upwards, glorying in his happy fortune
and despising all mankind. No attempt to assassinate him is recorded,
nor any apprehension of his on that score. He lived and died Sulla the
Fortunate.]

[Footnote 295: M. Æmilius Lepidus and Q. Lutatius Catulus were consuls
B.C. 78, the year of Sulla's death. Lepidus attempted to overthrow
Sulla's constitution after Sulla's death. He was driven from Rome by
Q. Catulus and Cn. Pompeius Magnus, and died B.C. 77 in Sardinia. This
Lepidus was the father of M. Lepidus the associate of Cæsar Octavianus
and M. Antonius in the triumvirate. (See the Life of M. Antonius.)

Catulus was the son of Lutatius Catulus who was once the colleague of
C. Marius in the consulship. He has received great praise from Cicero.
Sallustius calls him a defender of the aristocratical party, and C.
Licinius Macer, as quoted by Sallustius in his History, says that he
was more cruel than Sulla. We cannot trust Cicero's unqualified praise
of this aristocrat nor the censure of Sallustius. What would Cicero's
character be, if we had it from some one who belonged to the party of
Catiline? and what is it as we know it from his own writings?
Insincere, changing with the times, timid, revengeful, and, when he
was under the influence of fear, cruel.]

[Footnote 296: The Greek word ([Greek: theatron] θέατρον) from which
came the Roman Theatrum and our word Theatre, means a place for an
exhibition or spectacle. The Roman word for dramatic representations
is properly Scena. I do not know when the men and women had separate
seats assigned to them in the theatres. A law of the tribune L.
Roscius Otho B.C. 68 fixed the places in the theatres for the
different classes, and it may have assigned separate seats to the
women.]

[Footnote 298: Plutarch has translated the Roman word Imperator by the
Greek Autocrator ([Greek: Autokratôr] Αὐτοκράτωρ), "one who has
absolute power;" the title Autocrator under the Empire is the Greek
equivalent of the Roman Imperator, but hardly an equivalent at this
time. (See the Life of Cæsar.)]

[Footnote 299: This was the Quintus Roscius whom Cicero has so often
mentioned and in defence of whom he made a speech which is extant. The
subject of the action against Roscius is not easy to state in a few
words. (See the Argument of P. Manutius, and the Essay of Unterholzner
in Savigny's _Zeitschrift_, &c. i. p. 248.) Roscius is called Comœdus
in the title of Cicero's oration and by Plutarch, but he seems to have
acted tragedy also, as we may collect from some passages in Cicero.
The general name at Rome for an actor was histrio; but the histrio is
also contrasted by Cicero (_Pro Q. Roscio_, c. 10) with the comœdus,
as the inferior compared with the higher professor of the art. Yet
Roscius is sometimes called a histrio. Roscius was a perfect master of
his art, according to Cicero; and his name became proverbial among the
Romans to express a perfect master of any art. (Cicero, _De Oratore_,
i. 28.) Cicero was intimate with Roscius, and learned much from him
that was useful to him as an orator. Roscius wrote a work in which he
compared oratory and acting. His professional gains were immense; and
he had a sharp eye after his own interest, as the speech of Cicero
shows.]

[Footnote 300: The original is [Greek: lusiodos] λυσιοδός, which is
explained by Aristoxenus, quoted by Athenæus (p. 620), as I have
translated it.]

[Footnote 301: Appian does not mention this disease of Sulla, though
other writers do. Appian merely speaks of his dying of fever. Zachariæ
(Life of Sulla) considers the story of his dying of the lousy disease
as a fabrication of Sulla's enemies, and probably of the Athenians
whom he had handled so cruelly. This disease, called Morbus
Pediculosus or Pthiriasis, is not unknown in modern times. Plutarch
has collected instances from ancient times. Akastus belongs to the
mythic period. Alkman lived in the seventh century B.C.: fragments of
his poetry remain. This Pherekydes was what the Greeks called
Theologus, a man who speculated on things appertaining to the nature
of the gods. He is said to have been a teacher of Pythagoras, which
shows that he belongs to an uncertain period. He was not a
Philosopher; his speculations belonged to those cosmogonical dreams
which precede true philosophy, and begin again when philosophy goes to
sleep, as we see in the speculations of the present day. Kallisthenes
is mentioned in Plutarch's Life of Alexander, c. 55. He was thrown
into prison on a charge of conspiring against Alexander. This Mucius
the lawyer ([Greek: nomikos] νομικός), or jurisconsultus, as a Roman
would call him, is the P. Mucius Scævola who was consul in the year in
which Tiberius Gracchus was murdered.

There were two Servile wars in Sicily. Plutarch alludes to the first
which broke out B.C. 134, and is described in the Excerpts from the
thirty-fourth book of Diodorus. Diodorus says that Eunus died of this
disease in prison at Morgantina in Sicily.]

[Footnote 303: The Roman words Postumus, Postuma, seem to have been
generally used to signify a child born after the father's death. But
they also signified a child born after the father had made a will. The
word simply means "last." We use the expression "Posthumous child;"
but the meaning of the word is often misunderstood. (On the effect of
the birth of a Postumus on a father's will, see Smith's _Dictionary of
Antiquities_, art. "Heres, Roman.")

Appian (_Civil Wars_, i. 101) speaks of Sulla's death. He saw his
death coming and hastened to make his will: he died in his sixtieth
year, the most fortunate man in his end and in everything else, both
in name and estimation; if indeed, the historian wisely adds, a man
should think it good fortune to have obtained all his wishes.

Sulla had the following children:--Cornelia, by Ilia; she married Q.
Pompeius Rufus who was murdered B.C. 88, and she may have died before
her father: Cornelius Sulla, a son by Metella, who died, as Plutarch
has said, before his father: Faustus Cornelius Sulla and Fausta
Cornelia, the twin children by Metella, who were both young when their
father died. Faustus lost his life in Africa, when he was fighting on
the Pompeian side. Fausta's first husband was C. Memmius, from whom
she was divorced. She then married T. Annius Milo B.C. 55, who caught
her in the act of adultery with the historian Sallustius, who was
soundly hided by the husband and not let of till he had paid a sum of
money. Sallustius did not forget this.]

[Footnote 304: It was considered a mark of intentional disrespect or
of disapprobation, when a Roman made no mention of his nearest kin or
friends in his will; and in certain cases, the person who was passed
over could by legal process vindicate the imputation thus thrown on
him. (See the article "Testamentum," in Smith's _Dictionary of
Antiquities_, under the head "Querela Inofficiosi.") Sulla did not
like Cn. Pompeius. The only reason for keeping on terms with him was
that he saw his talents and so wished to ally him to his family. For
the same reason Sulla wished to put C. Julius Cæsar to death (Cæsar.
1): he predicted that he would be the ruin of the aristocratical
party. Sulla made his friend Lucius Lucullus the guardian of his
children and intrusted him with the final correction of his Memoirs.
(See the Life of Lucullus, c. 1).]

[Footnote 305: The description of the funeral in Appian (_Civil Wars_,
i. 105, &c.) is a striking picture. Sulla was buried with more than
regal pomp.

Plutarch's Life of Sulla has been spoken of as not one of his best
performances. But so far as concerns Plutarch's object in writing
these Lives, which was to exhibit character, it is as good as any of
his Lives, and it has great merit. Whether his anecdotes are always
authentic is a difficult matter to determine. Sulla had many enemies,
and it is probable that his character in private life has been made
worse than it was. The acts of his public life are well ascertained.
Plutarch has nearly omitted all mention of him as a Reformer of the
Roman Constitution and as a Legislator. Sulla's enactments were not
like the imperial constitutions of a later day, the mere act of one
who held the sovereign power: they were laws (leges) duly passed by
the popular assembly. Yet they were Sulla's work, and the legislative
body merely gave them the formal sanction. The object of Sulla's
constitutional measures was to give an aristocratical character to the
Roman constitution, to restore it to something of its pristine state,
and to weaken the popular party by curtailing the power of the
tribunes. The whole subject has often been treated, but at the
greatest length by Zachariæ, _Lucius Cornelius Sulla, &c._,
Heidelberg, 1834. Zachariæ has drawn the character of Sulla in an
apologetical tone. I think the character of Sulla is drawn better by
Plutarch, and that he has represented him as near to the life as a
biographer can do. Whatever discrepancies there may he between
Plutarch and other authorities, whatever Plutarch may have omitted
which other authorities give, still he has shown us enough to justify
his delineation of the most prominent man in the Republican Period of
Rome, with the exception of the Dictator Cæsar. But to complete the
view of his intellectual character, a survey of Sulla's legislation is
necessary. Sulla was an educated man: he was not a mere soldier like
Marius; he was not only a general; he was a man of letters, a lover of
the arts, a keen discriminator of men and times, a legislator, and a
statesman. He remodelled and reformed the whole criminal law of the
Romans. His constitutional measures were not permanent, but it may
truly be said that he prepared the way for the temporary usurpation of
Cæsar and the permanent establishment of the Roman State under
Augustus. I propose to treat of the Legislation of Sulla in an
Appendix to a future volume.]

COMPARISON OF LYSANDER AND SULLA

"In revolutions, villains rise to fame,"

and at Rome, at the period of which we are treating, the people were
utterly corrupt and degraded, and frequently changed their masters. We
need not wonder at Sulla's becoming supreme in Rome when such men as
Glaucia and Saturninus drove the Metelli into exile, when the sons of
consuls were butchered in the senate-house, when silver and gold
purchased soldiers and arms, and laws were enacted by men who silenced
their opponents by fire and the sword. I cannot blame a man who rises
to power at such a time as this, but I cannot regard it as any proof
of his being the best man in the state, if the state itself be in such
a condition of disorder. Now Lysander was sent out to undertake the
most important commands at a time when Sparta was well and orderly
governed, and proved himself the greatest of all the foremost men of
his age, the best man of the best regulated state. For this reason
Lysander, though he often laid down his office, was always re-elected
by his countrymen, for the renown of his abilities naturally pointed
him out as the fittest man to command: whereas Sulla, after being once
elected to lead an army, remained the chief man in Rome for ten
years, calling himself sometimes consul and sometimes dictator, but
always remaining a mere military despot.

II. We have related an attempt of Lysander to subvert the constitution
of Sparta; but he proceeded by a much more moderate and law-abiding
means than Sulla, for he meant to gain his point by persuasion, not by
armed force; and besides this he did not intend to destroy the
constitution utterly, but merely to reform the succession to the
throne. And it does not seem contrary to justice, that he who is best
among his peers should govern a city, which ruled in Greece by virtue,
not by nobility of blood.

A huntsman tries to obtain a good hound, and a horseman a good horse,
but does not trouble himself with their offspring, for the offspring
of his horse might turn out to be a mule. Just so in politics, the
important point is, what sort of man a ruler is, not from what family
he is descended. Even the Spartans in some cases dethroned their
kings, because they were not king-like but worthless men. If then vice
be disgraceful even in the nobly born, it follows that virtue does not
depend upon birth, but is honoured for itself.

The crimes of Lysander were committed for, those of Sulla against, his
friends. Indeed, what Lysander did wrong was done chiefly on behalf of
his friends, as, in order to establish them securely in their various
despotic governments, he caused many of their political opponents to
be put to death. Sulla, on the other hand, reduced the army of
Pompeius and the fleet which he himself had given to Dolabella to
command, merely to gratify his private spite. When Lucretius Ofella
sued for the consulship as the reward of many great exploits, he
ordered him to be put to death before his face, and thus made all men
fear and hate him by his barbarous treatment of his most intimate
friends.

III. Their several esteem for pleasure and for riches prove still more
clearly that Lysander was born to command men; Sulla to tyrannize over
them. The former, although he rose to such an unparalleled height of
power never was betrayed by it into any acts of insolent caprice, and
there never was a man to whom the well-known proverb

"A knave, whose tongue was sharper than his sword,"

for they were both of them men whom Mithridates would not have thought
a match for one of his grooms, or Marius for one of his lictors. Not
to mention the rest of the potentates, consuls, prætors and tribunes
with whom Sulla had to contend, what Roman was more to be dreaded than
Marius? What king more powerful than Mithridates? Who was there in
Italy more warlike than Lamponius and Pontius Telesinus? Yet Sulla
drove Marius into exile, crushed the power of Mithridates, and put
Lamponius and Pontius to death.

V. What, however, to my mind incontestably proves Sulla to have been
the greater man of the two, is that, whereas Lysander was always
loyally assisted by his countrymen in all his enterprises, Sulla,
during his campaign in Bœotia, was a mere exile. His enemies were
all-powerful at Rome. They had driven his wife to seek safety in
flight, had pulled down his house, and murdered his friends. Yet he
fought in his country's cause against overwhelming numbers, and gained
the victory. Afterwards, when Mithridates offered to join him and
furnish him with the means of overcoming his private enemies, he
showed no sign of weakness, and would not even speak to him or give
him his hand until he heard him solemnly renounce all claim to Asia
Minor, engage to deliver up his fleet, and to restore Bithynia and
Cappadocia to their native sovereigns. Never did Sulla act in a more
noble and high-minded manner. He preferred his country's good to his
own private advantage, and, like a well-bred hound, never relaxed his
hold till his enemy gave in, and then began to turn his attention to
redressing his own private wrongs.

LIFE OF KIMON.

Peripoltas, the soothsayer, after he had brought back King Opheltas
and the people under him to Bœotia, left a family which remained in
high repute for many generations, and chiefly settled in Chæronea,
which was the first city which they conquered when they drove out the
barbarians. As the men of this race were all brave and warlike, they
were almost reduced to extinction in the wars with the Persians, and
in later times with the Gauls during their invasion of Greece, so that
there remained but one male of the family, a youth of the name of
Damon, who was surnamed Peripoltas, and who far surpassed all the
youth of his time in beauty and spirit, although he was uneducated and
harsh-tempered. The commander of a detachment of Roman soldiers who
were quartered during the winter in Chæronea conceived a criminal
passion for Damon, who was then a mere lad, and as he could not effect
his purpose by fair means it was evident that he would not hesitate to
use force, as our city was then much decayed, and was despised, being
so small and poor. Damon, alarmed and irritated at the man's
behaviour, formed a conspiracy with a few young men of his own age,
not many, for secrecy's sake, but consisting of sixteen in all. These
men smeared their faces with soot, excited themselves by strong drink,
and assaulted the Roman officer just at daybreak, while he was
offering sacrifice in the market-place. They killed him and several of
his attendants, and then made their escape out of the city. During the
confusion which followed, the senate of the city of Chæronea assembled
and condemned the conspirators to death--a decree which was intended
to excuse the city to the Romans for what had happened. But that
evening, when the chief magistrates, as is their custom, were dining
together, Damon and his party broke into the senate-house, murdered
them all, and again escaped out of the city. It chanced that at this
time Lucius Lucullus was passing near Chæronea with an armed force. He
halted his troops, and, after investigating the circumstances,
declared that the city was not to blame, but had been the injured
party. As for Damon, who was living by brigandage and plunder of the
country, and who threatened to attack the city itself, the citizens
sent an embassy to him, and passed a decree guaranteeing his safety if
he would return. When he returned they appointed him president of the
gymnasium, and afterwards, while he was being anointed in the public
baths, they murdered him there.

Our ancestors tell us that as ghosts used to appear in that place, and
groans were heard there, the doors of the bath-room were built up; and
even at the present day those who live near the spot imagine that
shadowy forms are to be seen, and confused cries heard. Those of his
family who survive (for there are some descendants of Damon) live
chiefly in Phokis, near the city of Steiris. They call themselves
Asbolomeni, which in the Æolian dialect means "sooty-faced," in memory
of Damon having smeared his face with soot when he committed his
crimes.

"Rich as the Skopads, and as Kimon great,
    And like Agesilaus fortunate."

Indeed, Lichas the Spartan became renowned throughout Greece for
nothing except having entertained all the strangers who were present
at the festival of the Gymnopædia: while the profuse hospitality of
Kimon, both to strangers and his own countrymen, far surpassed even
the old Athenian traditions of the heroes of olden days; for though
the city justly boasts that they taught the rest of the Greeks to sow
corn, to discover springs of water, and to kindle fire, yet Kimon, by
keeping open house for all his countrymen, and allowing them to share
his crops in the country, and permitting his friends to partake of all
the fruits of the earth with him in their season, seemed really to
have brought back the golden age. If any scurrilous tongues hinted
that it was merely to gain popularity and to curry favour with the
people that he did these things, their slanders were silenced at once
by Kimon's personal tastes and habits, which were entirely
aristocratic and Spartan. He joined Aristeides in opposing
Themistokles when the latter courted the mob to an unseemly extent,
opposed Ephialtes when, to please the populace, he dissolved the
senate of the Areopagus, and, at a time when all other men except
Aristeides and Ephialtes were gorged with the plunder of the public
treasury, kept his own hands clean, and always maintained the
reputation of an incorruptible and impartial statesman. It is related
that one Rhœsakes, a Persian, who had revolted from the king, came to
Athens with a large sum of money, and being much pestered by the
mercenary politicians there, took refuge in the house of Kimon, where
he placed two bowls beside the door-posts, one of which he filled with
gold, and the other with silver darics.[311] Kimon smiled at this, and
inquired whether he wished him to be his friend, or his hired agent;
and when the Persian answered that he wished him to be a friend, he
said, "Then take this money away; for if I am your friend I shall be
able to ask you for it when I want it."

XI. When the allies of Athens, though they continued to pay their
contribution towards the war against Persia, refused to furnish men
and ships for it, and would not go on military expeditions any longer,
because they were tired of war and wished to cultivate their fields
and live in peace, now that the Persians no longer threatened them,
the other Athenian generals endeavoured to force them into performing
their duties, and by taking legal proceedings against the defaulters
and imposing fines upon them, made the Athenian empire very much
disliked. Kimon, on the other hand, never forced any one to serve, but
took an equivalent in money from those who were unwilling to serve in
person, and took their ships without crews, permitting them to stay at
home and enjoy repose, and by their luxury and folly convert
themselves into farmers and merchants, losing all their ancient
warlike spirit and skill, while by exercising many of the Athenians in
turn in campaigns and military expeditions, he rendered them the
masters of the allies by means of the very money which they themselves
supplied. The allies very naturally began to fear and to look up to
men who were always at sea, and accustomed to the use of arms, living
as soldiers on the profits of their own unwarlike leisure, and thus by
degrees, instead of independent allies, they sank into the position of
tributaries and subjects.

XIV. As some of the Persians, despising Kimon, who had set out from
Athens with a very small fleet, refused to leave the Chersonese, and
invited the Thracian tribes of the interior to assist them in
maintaining their position, he attacked them with four ships only,
took thirteen of the enemy's, drove out the Persians, defeated the
Thracians, and reconquered the Chersonese for Athens. After this he
defeated in a sea-fight the people of Thasos, who had revolted from
Athens, captured thirty-three of their ships, took their city by
storm, and annexed to Athens the district of the mainland containing
the gold mines, which had belonged to the Thasians. From Thasos he
might easily have invaded Macedonia and inflicted great damage upon
that country, but he refrained from doing so. In consequence of this
he was accused of having been bribed by Alexander, the king of
Macedonia, and his enemies at home impeached him on that charge. In
his speech in his own defence he reminded the court that he was the
_proxenus_,[313] or resident agent at Athens, not of the rich Ionians
or Thessalians, as some other Athenians were, with a view to their own
profit and influence, but of the Lacedæmonians, a people whoso frugal
habits he had always been eager and proud to imitate; so that he
himself cared nothing for wealth, but loved to enrich the state with
money taken from its enemies. During this trial, Stesimbrotus informs
us that Elpinike, Kimon's sister, came to plead her brother's cause
with Perikles, the bitterest of his opponents, and that Perikles
answered with a smile, "Elpinike, you are too old to meddle in affairs
of this sort." But for all that, in the trial he treated Kimon far
more gently than any of his other accusers, and spoke only once, for
form's sake.

XV. Thus was Kimon acquitted; and during the remainder of his stay in
Athens he continued to oppose the encroachments of the people, who
were endeavouring to make themselves the source of all political
power. When, however, he started again on foreign service, the
populace finally succeeded in overthrowing the old Athenian
constitution, and under the guidance of Ephialtes greatly curtailed
the jurisdiction of the Senate of the Areopagus, and turned Athens
into a pure democracy. At this time also Perikles was rising to power
as a liberal politician. Kimon, on his return, was disgusted at the
degradation of the ancient Senate of the Areopagus, and began to
intrigue with a view of restoring the aristocratic constitution of
Kleisthenes. This called down upon him a storm of abuse from the
popular party, who brought up again the old scandals about his sister,
and charged him with partiality for the Lacedæmonians. These
imputations are alluded to in the hackneyed lines of Eupolis:

"Not a villain beyond measure,
    Only fond of drink and pleasure;
    Oft he slept in Sparta's town,
    And left his sister here alone."

XVII. When Kimon with his relieving force marched to help the
Lacedæmonians, he passed through the territory of Corinth. Lachartus
objected to this, saying that he had marched in before he had asked
leave of the Corinthians, and reminded him that when men knock at a
door, they do not enter before the master of the house invites them to
come in. Kimon answered, "Lachartus, you Corinthians do not knock at
the doors of the cities of Megara or of Kleonæ, but break down the
door and force your way in by the right of the stronger, just as we
are doing now." By this timely show of spirit he silenced the
Corinthians, and passed through the territory of Corinth with his
army.

The Lacedæmonians invited the aid of the Athenians a second time, to
assist in the reduction of the fortress of Ithomé, which was held by
the Messenians and revolted helots; but when they arrived the
Lacedæmonians feared so brilliant and courageous a force, and sent
them back, accusing them of revolutionary ideas, although they did not
treat any other of their allies in this manner. The Athenians retired,
in great anger at the treatment they had received, and no longer
restrained their hatred of all who favoured the Lacedæmonians. On some
trifling pretext they ostracised Kimon, condemning him to exile for
ten years, which is the appointed time for those suffering from
ostracism. During this time the Lacedæmonians, after setting Delphi
free from the Phokians, encamped at Tanagra, and fought a battle there
with the Athenians, who came out to meet them. On this occasion Kimon
appeared, fully armed, and took his place in the ranks among his
fellow-tribesmen. However, the senate of the five hundred hearing of
this, became alarmed, and, as his enemies declared that his only
object was to create confusion during the battle and so to betray his
countrymen to the Lacedæmonians, they sent orders to the generals,
forbidding them to receive him. Upon this he went away, after having
begged Euthippus the Anaphlystian and those of his friends who were
especially suspected of Laconian leanings, to fight bravely, and by
their deeds to efface this suspicion from the minds of their
fellow-citizens. They took Kimon's armour, and set it up in their
ranks; and then, fighting in one body round it with desperate courage,
they all fell, one hundred in number, causing great grief to the
Athenians for their loss, and for the unmerited accusation which had
been brought against them. This event caused a revulsion of popular
feeling in favour of Kimon, when the Athenians remembered how much
they owed him, and reflected upon the straits to which they were now
reduced, as they had been defeated in a great battle at Tanagra, and
expected that during the summer Attica would be invaded by the
Lacedæmonians. They now recalled Kimon from exile; and Perikles
himself brought forward the decree for his restoration. So moderate
were the party-leaders of that time, and willing to subordinate their
own differences to the common welfare of their country.

XVIII. On his return Kimon at once put an end to the war, and
reconciled the two states. After the peace had been concluded,
however, he saw that the Athenians were unable to remain quiet, but
were eager to increase their empire by foreign conquest. In order,
therefore, to prevent their quarrelling with any other Greek state, or
cruising with a large fleet among the islands and the Peloponnesian
coast, and so becoming entangled in some petty war, he manned a fleet
of two hundred triremes with the intention of sailing a second time to
Cyprus and Egypt, wishing both to train the Athenians to fight against
barbarians, and also to gain legitimate advantages for Athens by the
plunder of her natural enemies. When all was ready, and the men were
about to embark, Kimon dreamed that he saw an angry dog barking at
him, and that in the midst of its barking it spoke with a human voice,
saying,

[Footnote 312: The Kyanean or Black Islands were at the junction of
the Bosporus with the Euxine, or Black Sea. The Chelidonian or Swallow
Islands were on the south coast of Lycia.]

[Footnote 313: The office of _proxenus_ corresponds most nearly to the
modern consul. He was bound to offer hospitality and assistance to any
persons of the state which he represented; but it must be remembered
that he was always a member of a foreign state.]

[Footnote 314: A seaport town in Cyprus.]

LIFE OF LUCULLUS.

I. The grandfather of Lucullus[315] was a man of consular rank, and
his uncle on the mother's side was Metellus,[316] surnamed Numidicus.
His father was convicted of peculation, and his mother, Cæcilia, had a
bad name as a woman of loose habits. Lucullus, while he was still a
youth, before he was a candidate for a magistracy and engaged in
public life, made it his first business to bring to trial his father's
accuser, Servilius the augur, as a public offender; and the matter
appeared to the Romans to be creditable to Lucullus, and they used to
speak of that trial as a memorable thing. It was, indeed, the popular
notion, that to prefer an accusation was a reputable measure, even
when there was no foundation for it, and they were glad to see the
young men fastening on offenders, like well-bred whelps laying hold of
wild beasts. However, there was much party spirit about that trial,
and some persons were even wounded and killed; but Servilius was
acquitted. Lucullus had been trained to speak both Latin and Greek
competently, so that Sulla, when he was writing his memoirs,[317]
dedicated them to Lucullus as a person who would put them together and
arrange his history better than himself; for the style of the oratory
of Lucullus was not merely suited to business and prompt, like that of
the other orators which disturbed the Forum--

"As a struck tunny throws about the sea,"[318]

"Dry, and for want of true discipline half dead"--

but he cultivated the appropriate and so-called liberal sciences, with
a view to self-improvement, from his early youth. When he was more
advanced in years he let his mind, as it were, after so many troubles,
find tranquillity and repose in philosophy, rousing to activity the
contemplative portion of his nature, and seasonably terminating and
cutting short his ambitious aspirations after his difference with
Pompeius. Now, as to his love of learning, this also is reported, in
addition to what has been mentioned: when he was a young man, in a
conversation with Hortensius,[319] the orator, and Sisenna,[320] the
historian, which began in jest, but ended in a serious proposition,
he agreed that if they would propose a poem and a history, Greek and
Roman, he would treat the subject of the Marsic war in whichsoever of
these two languages the lot should decide; and it seems that the lot
resulted in a Greek history, for there is still extant a Greek history
of the Marsic war by Lucullus.[321] Of his affection to his brother
Marcus[322] there were many proofs, but the Romans speak most of the
first; being older than his brother, he did not choose to hold a
magistracy by himself, but he waited till his brother was of the
proper age, and so far gained the public favour that his brother in
his absence was elected ædile jointly with him.

II. Though he was a young man during the Marsic war, he gave many
proofs of courage and prudence; but it was rather on account of the
solidity of his character and the mildness of his temper that Sulla
attached Lucullus to himself, and from the beginning he constantly
employed him in affairs of the greatest importance; one of which was
the matter relating to the coinage. It was Lucullus who superintended
the coining of most of the money in the Peloponnesus during the
Mithridatic war, and it was named Lucullean after him, and continued
for a long time to have a ready circulation, in consequence of the
demands of the war. Afterwards, Sulla, who was in possession of the
country about Athens,[323] but was shut out from supplies by sea by the
enemy, who had the command of it, sent Lucullus to Egypt and Libya to
get ships there. It was now the depth of winter, but still he set sail
with three Greek piratical ships, and the same number of Rhodian
biremes, exposing himself to a wide sea and to hostile vessels,
which, owing to their having the superiority, were cruising about in
great numbers and in all directions. However, he landed at Crete, and
made the people friendly to his cause; and, finding the Cyrenæans in a
state of confusion, owing to continual tyrannies and wars, he
tranquillised and settled the state, by reminding the citizens of a
certain expression of Plato, which the philosopher had addressed to
them in a prophetic spirit. They asked him, as it appears, to draw up
laws for them, and to settle their democracy after the model of a
well-ordered polity; but he replied that it was difficult to legislate
for the Cyrenæans while they were so prosperous. Nothing, indeed, is
more difficult to govern than a man who considers himself prosperous;
and, on the other hand, there is nothing more obedient to command than
a man when he is humbled by fortune. And it was this that made the
Cyrenæans tractable to Lucullus in his legislation for them. Sailing
from Cyrene[324] to Egypt, he lost most of his vessels by an attack of
pirates; but he escaped himself, and entered Alexandria in splendid
style; for the whole fleet came out to meet him, as it was used to do
when a king entered the port, equipped magnificently. The young king,
Ptolemæus,[325] showed him other surprising marks of attention, and
gave him a lodging and table in the palace, though no foreign general
had ever before been lodged there. He also offered him an allowance
for his expenditure, not such as he used to offer to others, but four
times as much; Lucullus, however, would not receive anything more than
his necessities required, nor yet any present, though the king sent
presents to the value of eighty talents. It is said that Lucullus did
not go up to Memphis,[326] nor make inquiry about any other of the
wondrous and far-famed things in Egypt; he said that such things
befitted an idle spectator, and one who had only to enjoy himself: not
a man like himself, who had left the Imperator encamped under the bare
sky, and close to the enemy's battlements.

III. Ptolemæus declined the alliance, being afraid of the war; but he
gave Lucullus ships to convoy him as far as Cyprus, and when he was
setting sail he embraced him and paid him great attention, and
presented him with an emerald set in gold, of great price. Lucullus at
first begged to be excused from taking the present; but when the king
showed him that the engraving contained his royal likeness, Lucullus
was afraid to refuse the present, lest, if he should be supposed to
sail away at complete enmity with the king, he might be plotted
against on the sea. In his voyage along the coast Lucullus got
together a number of vessels from the maritime towns except such as
participated in piratical iniquities, and passed over to Cyprus,
where, hearing that his enemies were lying in wait for him with their
ships at the headlands, he drew up all his vessels, and wrote to the
cities about winter quarters and supplies, as if he intended to stay
there till the fine season. As soon as a favourable opportunity
offered for his voyage, he launched his ships and got out to sea, and
by sailing during the day with his sails down and low, and putting
them up at night, he got safe to Rhodes. The Rhodians supplied him
with some more ships, and he persuaded the people of Kos and Knidus to
quit the king's side, and join him in an attack on the Samians. He
drove the king's party also out of Chios, and he gave the people of
Kolophon freedom by seizing Epigonus, their tyrant. It happened about
this time that Mithridates had left Pergamum, and was shut up in
Pitane.[327] While Fimbria[328] was keeping the king blockaded there
on the land side and pressing the siege, Mithridates, looking to the
sea, got together and summoned to him ships from every quarter, having
given up all design of engaging and fighting with Fimbria, who was a
bold man and had defeated him. Fimbria observing this, and being
deficient in naval force, sent to Lucullus, and prayed him to come
with his fleet and help him to take the most detested and the most
hostile of kings, in order that Mithridates, the great prize, which
had been followed through many contests and labours, might not escape
the Romans, now that he had given them a chance of seizing him, and
was caught within the nets. He said, if Mithridates was taken, no one
would have more of the glory than he who stopped his flight and laid
hold of him when he was trying to steal away; that if Mithridates were
shut out from the land by him, and excluded from the sea by Lucullus,
there would be a victory for both of them, and that as to the vaunted
exploits of Sulla at Orchomenus and Chæronea,[329] the Romans would
think nothing of them in comparison with this. There was nothing
unreasonable in all that Fimbria said; and it was plain to every man
that if Lucullus, who was at no great distance, had then accepted the
proposal of Fimbria, and led his ships there and blockaded the port
with his fleet, the war would have been at an end, and all would have
been delivered from innumerable calamities. But whether it was that
Lucullus regarded his duty to Sulla above all private and public
interests, or that he detested Fimbria, who was an abandoned man, and
had lately murdered his own friend and general,[330] merely from
ambition to command, or whether it was through chance, as the Deity
would have it, that he spared Mithridates, and reserved him for his
own antagonist--he would not listen to Fimbria, but allowed
Mithridates to escape by sea, and to mock the force of Fimbria.
Lucullus himself, in the first place, defeated off Lektum in the
Troad,[331] the king's ships, which showed themselves there, and again
observing that Neoptolemus was stationed at Tenedos with a larger
force, he sailed against him ahead of all the rest, in a Rhodian
galley of five banks which was commanded by Demagoras, a man well
affected to the Romans, and exceedingly skilful in naval battles.
Neoptolemus came against him at a great rate, and ordered the helmsman
to steer the ship right against the vessel of Lucullus; but Demagoras,
fearing the weight of the king's vessel and the rough brass that she
was fitted with, did not venture to engage head to head, but he
quickly turned his ship round and ordered them to row her stern
foremost,[332] and the vessel being thus depressed at the stern
received the blow, which was rendered harmless by falling on those
parts of the ship which were in the water. In the meantime his friends
coming to his aid, Lucullus commanded them to turn his ship's head to
the enemy; and, after performing many praiseworthy feats, he put the
enemy to flight, and pursued Neoptolemus.

IV. After this, Lucullus joined Sulla in the Chersonesus, as he was
going to cross the Hellespont, and he made the passage safe for him,
and assisted his army in getting over. When the treaty was made, and
Mithridates had sailed off to the Euxine, and Sulla had imposed a
contribution[333] of twenty thousand talents on Asia, and Lucullus had
been appointed to collect the money, and to strike coin, it appeared
some small consolation to the cities of Asia for the harshness of
Sulla that Lucullus not only behaved with honesty and justice, but
conducted himself mildly in the discharge of so oppressive and
disagreeable a duty. Though the Mitylenæans had openly revolted,
Lucullus wished them to come to their senses, and to submit to some
reasonable penalty for their ill-conduct in the matter of Marius;[334]
but perceiving that they were under the influence of some evil dæmon,
he sailed against them, and defeated them in a battle, and, after
shutting them up in their walls, and establishing a blockade, he
sailed out in open day to Elæa,[335] but he returned by stealth, and
laying an ambuscade near the city, kept quiet. The Mitylenæans
approached in disorder, and with confidence in the expectation of
plundering a deserted camp; but Lucullus falling on them took a great
number alive, and killed five hundred of them who made resistance. He
also took six thousand slaves, and the rest of the booty was past
count. But in the miseries which Sulla and Marius were at that time
bringing on the people of Italy, without limit and of every kind, he
had no share, being detained by his business in Asia by some happy
fortune. Nevertheless, he had not less favour with Sulla than the rest
of his friends; for, as I have said Sulla dedicated his memoirs to
Lucullus, as a token of his affection, and finally he appointed him
the guardian of his son, and passed by Pompeius. And this was probably
the origin of the difference and the jealousy between Lucullus and
Pompeius; for they were both young, and burning for distinction.

V. Shortly after Sulla's death, Lucullus was consul[336] with Marcus
Cotta, about the hundred and seventy-sixth Olympiad. Many persons were
again attempting to stir up the Mithridatic war, and Marcus said that
the war was not ended, but only stopped for a time. It was for this
reason that Lucullus was annoyed at the lot giving him for his
province Gaul within (south of) the Alps, which offered no opportunity
for great exploits. But the reputation of Pompeius, who was now in
Iberia, stung him most, as it was expected that Pompeius, in
preference to any one else, would be forthwith chosen to the command
of the war against Mithridates, if it should happen that the Iberian
war should be brought to a close. Accordingly, when Pompeius asked for
money,[337] and wrote to say that if they did not send it he would
leave Iberia and Sertorius, and lead his troops hack to Italy,
Lucullus did all he could to get money sent, and to prevent Pompeius
returning from Iberia on any pretence whatever while he was consul;
for he considered that the whole State would be at the disposal of
Pompeius if he were at Rome with so large an army. Cethegus,[338]
also, who had then the power in his hands by always speaking and
acting with a view to popularity, was at enmity with Lucullus, who
detested his habits of life, which were nothing but a course of
unnatural lusts, insolence, and violence. With Cethegus then Lucullus
was at open war. There was, indeed another demagogue, Lucius
Quintius,[339] who had set himself against Sulla's measures, and
attempted to disturb the present settlement of affairs; but Lucullus,
by much persuasion in private and reproof in public, drew him from his
designs, and quieted his ambition, in as politic and wholesome a way
as a man could do, by taking in hand so great a disease at its
commencement.

VI. In the meantime news arrived of the death of Octavius,[340] the
Governor of Cilicia. Now there were many eager competitors for the
province, who courted Cethegus as the person who was best able to help
them to it. As to Cilicia itself, Lucullus made no great account of
that province; but, inasmuch as he thought, if he should get Cilicia,
which bordered on Cappadocia, no one else would be sent to conduct the
war against Mithridates, he left no means untried to prevent the
province falling into other hands; and, at last, contrary to his
natural disposition, he submitted from necessity to do an act which
was not creditable, or commendable, though it was useful towards the
end he had in view. There was a woman named Præcia, who was famed
through Rome for her beauty and gallantry, and though in other
respects she was no better than a common prostitute, yet, as she
availed herself of her influence with those who visited her and talked
to her, for the purpose of forwarding the interests and political
views of her friends, she added to her other attractions the
reputation of being a woman who was much attached to her friends, and
very active in accomplishing anything, and she obtained great
influence. Cethegus, who was then at the height of his popularity, and
directed the administration, was captivated by Præcia, and began to
cohabit with her, and thus the whole power of the State fell into her
hands; for no public measure was transacted if Cethegus was not for
it, and if Præcia did not recommend it to Cethegus. Now Lucullus
gained over Præcia by presents and flattery; and, indeed, it was in
itself a great boon to a proud woman, fond of public display, to be
seen using her influence on behalf of Lucullus; and thus he soon had
Cethegus speaking in his favour, and trying to get Cilicia for him.
When Lucullus had once gained the province of Cilicia, it was no
longer necessary for him to call in the aid of Præcia or Cethegus, but
all alike readily put into his hands the conduct of the Mithridatic
war, believing that it could not be managed better by any other
person; for Pompeius was still fighting against Sertorius, and
Metellus[341] had withdrawn from service by reason of his age, and
these were the only persons who could be considered as rivals to
Lucullus in any dispute about the command in the war. However, Cotta,
the colleague of Lucullus, after making earnest application to the
Senate, was sent with some ships to watch the Propontis,[342] and to
defend Bithynia.

VII. Lucullus, with one legion which he had raised at home, crossed
over into Asia, where he took the command of the rest of the forces,
all of whom had long been spoiled by luxurious habits and living at
free quarters; and the soldiers of Fimbria were said to have become
difficult to manage, from being accustomed to obey no commander. They
were the men who joined Fimbria in putting to death Flaccus, who was a
consul and their general, and who gave up Fimbria himself to
Sulla[343]--self-willed and lawless men, but brave and full of
endurance, and experienced soldiers. However, in a short time,
Lucullus took down the insolence of these soldiers, and changed the
character of the rest, who then, for the first time, as it seems, knew
what it was to have a genuine commander and leader; for under other
generals, they were used to be courted, and spirited on to military
service in such wise as was agreeable to them. As to the enemy,
matters were thus: Mithridates, like most of the sophists,[344] full
of boasting at first, and rising up against the Romans arrogantly,
with an army unsubstantial in fact, but in appearance brilliant and
pompous, had failed in his undertaking, and exposed himself to
ridicule: but now, when he was going to commence the war a second
time, taught by experience he concentrated his powers in a real and
effectual preparation. Rejecting those motley numbers and many-tongued
threats of the barbarians, and arms ornamented with gold and precious
stones, which he considered to be the spoils of the victors, and to
give no strength to those who possess them, he set about having Roman
swords made, and heavy shields manufactured; and he got together
horses which were well trained, instead of horses which were well
caparisoned; and one hundred and twenty thousand foot-soldiers who
were disciplined to the Roman order of battle, and sixteen thousand
horse-soldiers, without reckoning the scythe-bearing four-horse
chariots, and these were a hundred; besides, his ships were not filled
with tents embroidered with gold, nor with baths for concubines, nor
apartments for the women luxuriously furnished; but fitting them out
fully with arms, missiles, and stores, he invaded Bithynia, where he
was again gladly received by the cities, and not by these cities only,
for a return of their former calamities had visited all Asia, which
was suffering past endurance from the Roman money-lenders[345] and
farmers of the taxes.[346] These men, who, like so many harpies, were
plundering the people of their substance, Lucullus afterwards drove
out; but, for the time, he endeavoured by reproof to make them more
moderate in their conduct, and he stopped the insurrection of the
towns, when, so to speak, not a single man in them was quiet.

VIII. While Lucullus was busied about these matters, Cotta, thinking
it a good opportunity for himself, was preparing to fight with
Mithridates; and, though many persons brought him intelligence that
Lucullus was encamped in Phrygia on his advanced march, Cotta,
thinking that he had the triumph all but in his hands, hastened to
engage, that Lucullus might have no share in it. But he was defeated
by land and by sea at the same time; and he lost sixty vessels with
all the men in them, and four thousand foot-soldiers, and he was shut
up in Chalkedon[347] and besieged there, and obliged to look for help
at the hands of Lucullus. Now there were some who urged Lucullus not
to care for Cotta, but to advance forward, as he would be able to
seize the kingdom of Mithridates, which was unprotected; and this was
the language of the soldiers especially, who were indignant that
Cotta, not satisfied with ruining himself and those with him by his
imprudent measures, should be a hindrance to their getting a victory
without a contest when it was in their power; but Lucullus said in
reply to all this in an harangue, that he would rather save one Roman
from the enemy than get all that the enemy had. And when
Archelaus,[348] who had commanded for Mithridates in Bœotia, and
afterwards had left him, and was now in the Roman army, maintained
that if Lucullus would only show himself in Pontus, he might make
himself master of everything at once, Lucullus replied that he was not
a greater coward than huntsmen, which he should be if he passed by the
wild beasts and went to their empty dens. Saying this he advanced
against Mithridates, with thirty thousand foot-soldiers and two
thousand five hundred cavalry. On arriving in sight of the enemy, he
was startled at their numbers, and wished to avoid a battle and to
protract the time. Marius, however, whom Sertorius had sent from
Iberia to Mithridates in command of a force, came out to meet
Lucullus, and challenged him to the contest, on which Lucullus put his
army in order of battle; and they were just on the point of commencing
the engagement, when, without any evident change, but all at once, the
sky opened, and there appeared a huge flame-like body, which came down
between the two armies, in form most like a cask, and in colour
resembling molten silver, so that both armies were alarmed at the
sight and separated. This, it is said, took place in Phrygia, at a
place called Otryæ. Lucullus, considering that it was not possible for
any human resources or wealth to maintain for any length of time, and
in the presence of an enemy, so many thousands as Mithridates had,
ordered one of the prisoners to be brought to him, and asked him first
how many messmates he had, and then how much provision he had left in
his tent. When the man had given his answer, he ordered him to be
removed, and he put the same question to a second, and to a third.
Then comparing the amount of provisions that the enemy had with the
number of those who were to be fed, he concluded that the enemy's
provisions would fail them in three or four days. He now stuck still
more closely to his plan of protracting the time, and he employed
himself in getting into his camp a great store of provision, that he
might have abundance himself, and so wait till the enemy was reduced
to want.

Waking from sleep, Lucullus called his friends and told them his
dream, while it was still night; and there came persons from Ilium,
who reported that thirteen of the king's quinqueremes had been seen
near the Achæan harbour, moving in the direction of Lemnos.
Immediately setting sail, Lucullus captured these vessels and killed
their commander, Isidorus, and he then advanced against the other
captains. Now, as they happened to be at anchor, they drew all their
vessels together up to the land, and, fighting from the decks, dealt
blows on the men of Lucullus; for the ground rendered it impossible to
sail round to the enemy's rear, and, as the ships of Lucullus were
afloat, they could make no attack on those of the enemy, which were
planted close to the land and securely situated. However, with some
difficulty, Lucullus landed the bravest of his soldiers in a part of
the island which was accessible, who, falling on the rear of the
enemy, killed some and compelled the rest to cut their cables and make
their escape from the land, and so to drive their vessels foul of one
another, and to be exposed to the blows of the vessels of Lucullus.
Many of the enemy perished; but among the captives there was
Marius,[359] he who was sent from Sertorius. Marius had only one eye,
and the soldiers had received orders from Lucullus, as they were
setting out on the expedition, to kill no one-eyed man; for Lucullus
designed to make Marius die a shameful and dishonourable death.

XIII. As soon as he had accomplished this, Lucullus hastened in
pursuit of Mithridates; for he expected still to find him about
Bithynia, and watched by Voconius, whom he had sent with ships to
Nikomedia[360] to follow up the pursuit. But Voconius lingered in
Samothrakia,[361] where he was getting initiated into mysteries and
celebrating festivals. Mithridates, who had set sail with his
armament, and was in a hurry to reach Pontus before Lucullus returned,
was overtaken by a violent storm, by which some of his ships were
shattered and others were sunk; and all the coast for many days was
filled with the wrecks that were cast up by the waves. The
merchant-vessel in which Mithridates was embarked could not easily be
brought to land by those who had the management of it, by reason of
its magnitude, in the agitated state of the water, and the great
swell, and it was already too heavy to hold out against the sea, and
was water-logged; accordingly the king got out of the vessel into a
piratical ship, and, intrusting his person to pirates, contrary to
expectation and after great hazard he arrived at Heraklea[362] in
Pontus. Now it happened that the proud boast of Lucullus to the Senate
brought on him no divine retribution.[363] The Senate was voting a sum
of three thousand talents to equip a navy for the war, but Lucullus
stopped the measure by sending a letter, couched in vaunting terms, in
which he said, that without cost and so much preparation, he would
with the ships of the allies drive Mithridates from the sea. And he
did this with the aid of the deity; for it is said that it was owing
to the anger of Artemis Priapine[364] that the storm fell on the
Pontic soldiers, who had plundered her temple and carried off the
wooden statue.

XIV. Though many advised Lucullus to suspend the war, he paid no heed
to them: but, passing through Bithynia and Galatia, he invaded the
country of the king. At first he wanted provisions, so that thirty
thousand Galatians followed him, each carrying on his shoulders a
medimnus of wheat; but as he advanced and reduced all into his power,
he got into such abundance of everything that an ox was sold in the
camp for a drachma, and a slave for four drachmæ; and, as to the rest
of the booty, it was valued so little that some left it behind, and
others destroyed it; for there were no means of disposing of anything
to anybody when all had abundance. The Roman army had advanced with
their cavalry and carried their incursions as far as Themiskyra and
the plains on the Thermodon,[365] without doing more than wasting and
ravaging the country, when the men began to blame Lucullus for
peaceably gaining over all the cities, and they complained that he had
not taken a single city by storm, nor given them an opportunity of
enriching themselves by plunder. "Nay, even now," they said, "we are
quitting Amisus,[366] a prosperous and wealthy city, which it would be
no great matter to take, if any one would press the siege, and the
general is leading us to fight with Mithridates in the wilds of the
Tibareni and Chaldæans."[367] Now, if Lucullus had supposed that
these notions would have led the soldiers to such madness as they
afterwards showed he would not have overlooked or neglected these
matters, nor have apologised instead to those men who were blaming his
tardiness for thus lingering in the neighbourhood of insignificant
villages for a long time, and allowing Mithridates to increase his
strength. "This is the very thing," he said, "that I wish, and I am
sitting here with the design of allowing the man again to become
powerful, and to get together a sufficient force to meet us, that he
may stay, and not fly from us when we advance. Do you not see that a
huge and boundless wilderness is in his rear, and the Caucasus[368] is
near, and many mountains which are full of deep valleys, sufficient to
hide ten thousand kings who decline a battle, and to protect them? and
it is only a few days' march from Kabeira[369] into Armenia, and above
the plains of Armenia Tigranes[370] the King of Kings has his
residence, with a force which enables him to cut the Parthian off from
Asia, and he removes the inhabitants of the Greek cities up into
Media, and he is master of Syria and Palestine, and the kings, the
descendants of Seleucus, he puts to death, and carries off their
daughters and wives captives. Tigranes is the kinsman and son-in-law
of Mithridates. Indeed, he will not quietly submit to receive
Mithridates as a suppliant; but he will war against us, and, if we
strive to eject Mithridates from his kingdom we shall run the risk of
drawing upon us Tigranes, who has long been seeking for a pretext
against us, and he could not have a more specious pretext than to be
compelled to aid a man who is his kinsman and a king. Why, then,
should we bring this about, and show Mithridates, who does not know
it, with whose aid he ought to carry on the war against us? and why
should we drive him against his wish, and ingloriously, into the arms
of Tigranes, instead of giving him time to collect a force out of his
own resources and to recover his courage, and so fight with the
Kolchi, and Tibareni, and Cappadocians, whom we have often defeated,
rather than fight with the Medes and Armenians?"

XXI. Appius Clodius,[383] who was sent to Tigranes (now Clodius was
the brother of the then wife of Lucullus), was at first conducted by
the king's guides through the upper part of the country, by a route
unnecessarily circuitous and roundabout, and one that required many
days' journeying; but, as soon as the straight road was indicated to
him by a freedman, a Syrian by nation, he quitted that tedious and
tricky road, and, bidding his barbarian guides farewell, he crossed
the Euphrates in a few days, and arrived at Antiocheia,[384] near
Daphne. There he waited for Tigranes, pursuant to the king's orders
(for Tigranes was absent, and still engaged in reducing some of the
Phœnician cities), and in the meantime he gained over many of the
princes who paid the Armenian a hollow obedience, among whom was
Zarbienus, King of Gordyene,[385] and he promised aid from Lucullus to
many of the enslaved cities, which secretly sent to him--bidding them,
however, keep quiet for the present. Now the rule of the Armenians was
not tolerable to the Greeks, but was harsh; and what was worse, the
king's temper had become violent and exceedingly haughty in his great
prosperity; for he had not only everything about him which the many
covet and admire, but he seemed to think that everything was made for
him. Beginning with expectations which were slight and contemptible,
he had subdued many nations, and humbled the power of the Parthians as
no man before him had done; and he filled Mesopotamia with Greeks,
many from Cilicia and many from Cappadocia, whom he removed and
settled. He also removed from their abodes the Skenite Arabians,[386]
and settled them near him, that he might with their aid have the
benefit of commerce. Many were the kings who were in attendance on
him; but there were four who were always about him, like attendants or
guards, and when he mounted his horse they ran by his side in jackets;
and when he was seated and transacting business, they stood by with
their hands clasped together, which was considered to be of all
attitudes the most expressive of servitude, as if they had sold their
freedom, and were presenting their bodies to their master in a posture
indicating readiness to suffer rather than to act. Appius, however,
was not alarmed or startled at the tragedy show; but, as soon as he
had an opportunity of addressing the king, he told him plainly that he
was come to take back Mithridates, as one who belonged to the
triumphs of Lucullus, or to denounce war against Tigranes. Though the
king made an effort to preserve a tranquil mien, and affected a smile
while he was listening to the address, he could not conceal from the
bystanders that he was disconcerted by the bold speech of the youth,
he who had not for near five-and-twenty years[387] heard the voice of
a free man; for so many years had he been king, or rather tyrant.
However, he replied to Appius that he would not give up Mithridates,
and that he would resist the Romans if they attacked him. He was angry
with Lucullus because he addressed him in his letter by the title of
King only, and not King of Kings, and, accordingly in his reply,
Tigranes did not address Lucullus by the title of Imperator. But he
sent splendid presents to Appius, and when they were refused he sent
still more. Appius, not wishing to appear to reject the king's
presents from any hostile feeling, selected from among them a goblet,
and sent the rest back; and then with all speed set off to join the
Imperator.

XXII. Now, up to this time, Tigranes had not deigned to see
Mithridates,[388] nor to speak to him, though Mithridates was allied
to him by marriage, and had been ejected from so great a kingdom; but,
in a degrading and insulting manner, he had allowed Mithridates to be
far removed from him, and, in a manner, kept a prisoner in his abode,
which was a marshy and unhealthy place. However, he now sent for him
with demonstrations of respect and friendship. In a secret conference
which took place in the palace, they endeavoured to allay their mutual
suspicions, by turning the blame on their friends, to their ruin. One
of them was Metrodorus[389] of Skepsis, an agreeable speaker, and a
man of great acquirements, who enjoyed so high a degree of favour with
Mithridates that he got the name of the king's father. Metrodorus, as
it seems, had once been sent on an embassy from Mithridates to
Tigranes, to pray for aid against the Romans, on which occasion
Tigranes asked him, "But you, Metrodorus, what do you advise me in
this matter?" Metrodorus, either consulting the interests of Tigranes,
or not wishing Mithridates to be maintained in his kingdom, replied,
that, as ambassador, he requested him to send aid, but, in the
capacity of adviser, he told him not to send any. Tigranes reported
this to Mithridates, to whom he gave the information, not expecting
that he would inflict any extreme punishment on Metrodorus. But
Metrodorus was forthwith put to death, and Tigranes was sorry for what
he had done, though he was not altogether the cause of the misfortune
of Metrodorus: indeed what he had said merely served to turn the
balance in the dislike of Mithridates towards Metrodorus; for
Mithridates had for a long time disliked Metrodorus, and this was
discovered from his private papers, that fell into the hands of the
Romans, in which there were orders to put Metrodorus to death. Now,
Tigranes interred the body with great pomp, sparing no expense on the
man, when dead, whom he had betrayed when living. Amphikrates the
rhetorician also lost his life at the court of Tigranes, if he too
deserves mention for the sake of Athens. It is said that he fled to
Seleukeia,[390] on the Tigris, and that when the citizens there asked
him to give lectures on his art, he treated them with contempt,
saying, in an arrogant way, that a dish would not hold a dolphin.
Removing himself from Seleukeia, he betook himself to Kleopatra, who
was the daughter of Mithridates, and the wife of Tigranes; but he soon
fell under suspicion, and, being excluded from all communion with the
Greeks, he starved himself to death. Amphikrates also received an
honourable interment from Kleopatra, and his body lies at Sapha, a
place in those parts so called.

XXIII. After conferring on Asia, the fulness of good administration
and of peace, Lucullus did not neglect such things as would gratify
the people and gain their favour; but during his stay at Ephesus he
gained popularity in the Asiatic cities by processions and public
festivals in commemoration of his victories, and by contests of
athletes and gladiators. The cities on their side made a return by
celebrating festivals, called after the name of Lucullus, to do honour
to the man; and they manifested towards him what is more pleasing than
demonstrations of respect, real affection. Now, when Appius had
returned, and it appeared that there was to be war with Tigranes,
Lucullus again advanced into Pontus, and, getting his troops together,
he besieged Sinope,[391] or rather the Cilicians of the king's party,
who were in possession of the city; but the Cilicians made their
escape by night, after massacring many of the Sinopians, and firing
the city. Lucullus, who saw what was going on, made his way into the
city, and slaughtered eight thousand of the Cilicians, who were left
there; but he restored to the rest of the inhabitants their property,
and provided for the interests of Sinope, mainly by reason of a vision
of this sort: he dreamed that a man stood by him in his sleep, and
said, "Advance a little, Lucullus; for Autolykus is come, and wishes
to meet with you." On waking, Lucullus could not conjecture what was
the meaning of the vision; but he took the city on that day, and,
while pursuing the Cilicians, who were escaping in their ships, he saw
a statue lying on the beach, which the Cilicians had not had time to
put on board; and the statue was the work of Sthenis,[392] one of his
good performances. Now, somebody told Lucullus that it was the statue
of Autolykus, the founder of Sinope. Autolykus is said to have been
one of those who joined Herakles from Thessalia, in his expedition
against the Amazons, and a son of Deimachus. In his voyage home, in
company with Demoleon and Phlogius, he lost his ship, which was
wrecked at the place called Pedalium, in the Chersonesus:[393] but he
escaped with his arms and companions to Sinope, which he took from the
Syrians: for Sinope was in possession of the Syrians, who were
descended from Syrus, the son of Apollo, according to the story, and
Sinope, the daughter of Asopus. On hearing this, Lucullus called to
mind the advice of Sulla, who in his 'Memoirs' advised to consider
nothing so trustworthy and safe as that which is signified in dreams.
Lucullus was now apprised that Mithridates and Tigranes were on the
point of entering Lycaonia and Cilicia, with the intention of
anticipating hostilities by an invasion of Asia, and he was surprised
that the Armenian, if he really intended to attack the Romans, did not
avail himself of the aid of Mithridates, in the war when he was at the
height of his power, nor join his forces to those of Mithridates when
he was strong but allowed him to be undone and crushed; and now began
a war that offered only cold hopes, and throw himself on the ground to
join those who were already there and unable to rise.

XXV. Now, as the first person who reported to Tigranes that Lucullus
was in the country got nothing for his pains, but had his head cut
off, nobody else would tell him, and Tigranes was sitting in ignorance
while the fires of war were burning round him, and listening to
flattering words, That Lucullus would be a great general if he should
venture to stand against Tigranes at Ephesus, and should not flee
forthwith from Asia, at the sight of so many tens of thousands. So
true it is, that it is not every man who can bear much wine, nor is it
any ordinary understanding that in great prosperity does not lose all
sound judgment. The first of his friends who ventured to tell him the
truth was Mithrobarzanes; and he, too, got no reward for his boldness
in speaking; for he was sent forthwith against Lucullus, with three
thousand horsemen and a very large body of infantry, with orders to
bring the general alive, and to trample down his men. Now, part of the
army of Lucullus was preparing to halt, and the rest was still
advancing. When the scouts reported that the barbarian was coming upon
them, Lucullus was afraid that the enemy would fall upon his troops
while they were divided and not in battle order, and so put them into
confusion. Lucullus himself set to work to superintend the encampment,
and he sent Sextilius, one of his legati, with sixteen hundred
horsemen, and hoplitæ[397] and light-armed troops, a few more in
number, with orders to approach close to the enemy, and wait till he
should hear that the soldiers who were with him had made their
encampment. Sextilius wished to follow his orders; but he was
compelled to engage by Mithrobarzanes, who was confidently advancing
against him. A battle ensued, in which Mithrobarzanes fell fighting;
and the rest, taking to flight, were all cut to pieces with the
exception of a few. Upon this Tigranes left Tigranocerta,[398] a large
city which he had founded, and retreated to the Taurus, and there
began to get together his forces from all parts: but Lucullus,
allowing him no time for preparation, sent Murena to harass and cut
off those who were collecting to join Tigranes, and Sextilius on the
other side to check a large body of Arabs, who were approaching to
the king. It happened just at the same time that Sextilius fell on the
Arabs as they were encamping and killed most of them, and Murena,
following Tigranes, took the opportunity of attacking him as he was
passing through a rough and narrow defile with his army in a long
line. Tigranes fled, and left behind him all his baggage; and many of
the Armenians were killed and still more taken prisoners.

XXVI. After this success Lucullus broke up his camp and marched
against Tigranocerta, which he surrounded with his lines, and began to
besiege. There were in the city many Greeks, a part of those who had
been removed from Cilicia, and many barbarians who had fared the same
way with the Greeks, Adiabeni,[399] and Assyrians, and Gordyeni and
Cappadocians, whose native cities Tigranes had digged down, and had
removed the inhabitants and settled them there. The city was also
filled with wealth and sacred offerings, for every private individual
and prince, in order to please the king, contributed to the increase
and ornament of the city. For this reason Lucullus pressed the siege,
thinking that Tigranes would not endure this, but even contrary to his
judgment, would come down in passion and fight a battle; and he was
not mistaken. Now, Mithridates, both by messengers and letters,
strongly advised Tigranes not to fight a battle, but to cut off the
enemy's supplies by means of his cavalry; and Taxiles[400] also, who
had come from Mithridates to join Tigranes, earnestly entreated the
king to keep on the defensive, and to avoid the arms of the Romans, as
being invincible. Tigranes at first readily listened to this advice:
but when the Armenians and Gordyeni had joined him with all their
forces, and the kings were come, bringing with them all the power of
the Medes and Adiabeni, and many Arabs had arrived from the sea that
borders on Babylonia, and many Albanians from the Caspian, and
Iberians, who are neighbours of the Albanians; and not a few of the
tribes about the Araxes,[401] who are not governed by kings, had come
to join him, induced by solicitations and presents, and the banquets
of the king were filled with hopes and confidence and barbaric
threats, and his councils also,--Taxiles narrowly escaped death for
opposing the design of fighting, and it was believed that Mithridates
wished to divert Tigranes from obtaining a great victory, merely from
envy. Accordingly, Tigranes would not even wait for Mithridates, for
fear he should share in the glory; but he advanced with all his force,
and greatly complained to his friends, it is said, that he would have
to encounter Lucullus alone, and not all the Roman generals at once.
And his confidence was not altogether madness nor without good
grounds, when he looked upon so many nations and kings following him,
and bodies of hoplitæ, and tens of thousands of horsemen; for he was
at the head of twenty thousand bowmen and slingers and fifty-five
thousand horsemen, of whom seventeen thousand were clothed in armour
of mail, as Lucullus said in his letter to the Senate, and one hundred
and fifty thousand hoplitæ, some of whom were drawn up in cohorts and
others in phalanx; and of road-makers, bridge-makers, clearers of
rivers, timber-cutters, and labourers for other necessary purposes,
there were thirty-five thousand, who, being placed behind the fighting
men, added to the imposing appearance and the strength of the army.

XXVII. When Tigranes had crossed the Taurus, and, showing himself with
all his forces, looked down on the Roman army, which was encamped
before Tigranocerta, the barbarians in the city hailed his appearance
with shouts and clapping of hands, and from their walls with threats
pointed to the Armenians. As Lucullus was considering about the
battle, some advised him to give up the siege, and march against
Tigranes; others urged him not to leave so many enemies in his rear,
nor to give up the siege. Lucullus replied, that singly they did not
advise well, but that taken both together the counsel was good; on
which he divided his army. He left Murena with six thousand foot to
maintain the siege; and himself taking twenty-four cohorts, among
which there were not above ten thousand hoplitæ, with all his cavalry
and slingers and bowmen, to the number of about one thousand, advanced
against the enemy. Lucullus, encamping in a large plain by the bank of
the river, appeared contemptible to Tigranes, and furnished matter for
amusement to the king's flatterers. Some scoffed at him, and others,
by way of amusement, cast lots for the spoil, and all the generals and
kings severally applied to the king, and begged the matter might be
intrusted to each of them singly, and that Tigranes would sit as a
spectator. Tigranes also attempted to be witty, and, in a scoffing
manner, he uttered the well-known saying, "If they have come as
ambassadors, there are too many of them; if as soldiers, too few."
Thus they amused themselves with sarcastic sayings and jokes. At
daybreak Lucullus led out his troops under arms. Now the barbarian
army was on the east side of the river; but, as the river makes a bend
towards the west, at a part where it was easiest to ford, Lucullus led
his troops out, and hurried in that direction, which led Tigranes to
think that he was retreating; and calling Taxiles to him he said, with
a laugh, "Don't you see that these invincible Roman warriors are
flying?" Taxiles replied: "I should be pleased, O king, at any strange
thing happening which should be lucky to you; but the Roman soldiers
do not put on their splendid attire when they are on a march; nor have
they then their shields cleaned, and their helmets bare, as they now
have, by reason of having taken off the leathern coverings; but this
brightness of their armour is a sign they are going to fight, and are
now marching against their enemies." While Taxiles was still speaking
the first eagle came in sight; for Lucullus had now faced about, and
the cohorts were seen taking their position in manipuli for the
purpose of crossing the river: on which Tigranes, as if he were hardly
recovering from a drunken bout, called out two or three times, "What,
are they coming against us?" and so, with much confusion, the enemy's
soldiers set about getting into order, the king taking his position in
the centre, and giving the left wing to the King of the Adiabeni, and
the right to the Mede, on which wing also were the greater part of
the soldiers, clad in mail, occupying the first ranks. As Lucullus was
going to cross the river, some of the officers bade him beware of the
day, which was one of the unlucky days which the Romans call black
days; for on that day Cæpio[402] and his army were destroyed in a
battle with the Cimbri. Lucullus replied in these memorable words:
"Well, I will make it a lucky day for the Romans." The day was the
sixth of October.

XXXIII. So far one may say that fortune accompanied Lucullus and
shared his campaigns: but from this time, just as if a wind had failed
him, trying to force everything and always meeting with obstacles, he
displayed indeed the courage and endurance of a good commander, but
his undertakings produced him neither fame nor good opinion, and even
the reputation that he had he came very near losing by his want of
success and his fruitless disputes. Lucullus himself was in no small
degree the cause of all this; for he was not a man who tried to gain
the affection of the soldiery, and he considered everything that was
done to please the men as a disparagement to the general's power, and
as tending to destroy it. But, what was worst of all, he was not
affable to the chief officers and those of the same rank as himself;
he despised everybody, and thought no man had any merit compared with
his own.[413] These bad qualities, it is said, that Lucullus had,
though he possessed many merits. He was tall and handsome, a powerful
speaker, and equally prudent in the Forum and the camp. Now,
Sallustius says that the soldiers were ill-disposed towards him at the
very commencement of the war before Kyzikus, and again at Amisus,
because they were compelled to spend two winters in succession in
camp. They were also vexed about the other winters, for they either
spent them in a hostile country, or encamped among the allies under
the bare sky; for Lucullus never once entered a Greek and friendly
city with his army. While the soldiers were in this humour, they
received encouragement from the demagogues at Rome, who envied
Lucullus, and charged him with protracting the war through love of
power and avarice. They said that he all but held at once Cilicia,
Asia, Bithynia, Paphlagonia, Galatia, Pontus, Armenia, and the parts
as far as the Phasis, and that at last he had plundered even the
palace of Tigranes, as if he had been sent to strip kings and not to
conquer them. This, it is said, was urged by one of the prætors,
Lucius Quintus,[414] by whom they were mainly persuaded to pass a
decree to send persons to supersede Lucullus in his province. They
also decreed that many of the soldiers under Lucullus should be
released from service.

XXXIV. To these causes, in themselves so weighty, there was added
another that, most of all, ruined the measures of Lucullus; and this
was Publius Clodius, a violent man, and full of arrogance and
audacity. He was the brother of the wife of Lucullus, a woman of most
dissolute habits, whom he was also accused of debauching. At this time
he was serving with Lucullus, and he did not get all the distinction
to which he thought himself entitled. In fact, he aspired to the first
rank, and, as there were many preferred before him, in consequence of
his character, he secretly endeavoured to win the favour of Fimbria's
army, and to excite the soldiers against Lucullus, by circulating
among them words well suited to those who were ready to hear them, and
were not unaccustomed to be courted. These were the men whom Fimbria
had persuaded to kill the consul Flaccus, and to choose himself for
their general. Accordingly, they gladly listened to Clodius, and
called him the soldier's friend, for he pretended to feel indignant at
their treatment. "Was there never to be an end," he would say, "to so
many wars and dangers, and were they to wear out their lives in
fighting with every nation, and wandering over every country, and
getting no equivalent for so much service, but, instead thereof, were
they to convoy waggons and camels of Lucullus, loaded with cups of
gold, set with precious stones, while the soldiers of Pompeius were
now living as citizens,[415] and with their wives and children were
sitting quiet in the enjoyment of fertile lands and cities, though
they had not driven Mithridates and Tigranes into uninhabited
wildernesses, nor pulled down the palaces of Asia, but had fought with
exiles in Iberia, and runaway slaves in Italy? Why, then, if there is
never to be an end of our service, do we not reserve what remains of
our bodies and our lives for a general who considers the wealth of the
soldiers his chief glory?" By such causes as these the army of
Lucullus was corrupted, and his soldiers refused to follow him either
against Tigranes or against Mithridates, who immediately made an
irruption from Armenia into Pontus, and endeavoured to recover his
power; but alleging the winter as an excuse, the soldiers lingered in
Gordyene, expecting every moment that Pompeius, or some other
commander,[416] would arrive to supersede Lucullus.

XXXV. But when news came that Mithridates had defeated Fabius,[417]
and was marching against Sornatius and Triarius, through very shame
the soldiers followed Lucullus. Triarius, being ambitious to snatch
the victory which he thought was in his grasp, before Lucullus, who
was near, should arrive, was defeated in a great battle. It is said
that above seven thousand Romans fell, among whom were a hundred and
fifty centurions, and twenty-four tribunes; and Mithridates took the
camp. Lucullus arrived a few days after, and secreted from the
soldiers Triarius, whom in their passion, they wore looking for; and,
as Mithridates was not willing to fight, but was waiting for Tigranes,
who was already coming down with a large force, Lucullus determined to
march back, and to fight with Tigranes before he and Mithridates could
unite. As he was on his march the soldiers of Fimbria mutinied, and
left their ranks, considering that they were released from service by
the decree of the Senate, and that Lucullus had no longer any right to
the command, now that the provinces were assigned to others. Upon this
there was nothing, however inconsistent with his dignity, which
Lucullus did not submit to do--supplicating the soldiers individually,
and going about from tent to tent in humble manner, and with tears in
his eyes, and sometimes even taking the soldiers by the hand. But they
rejected his proffered hand, and threw down before him their empty
purses, and told him to fight with the enemy himself, for he was the
only person who knew how to get rich from them. However, at the
request of the rest of the army, the soldiers of Fimbria were
constrained, and agreed to stay to the end of summer, and if, in the
meantime, no enemy should come down to fight them, they were then to
be released. Lucullus was of necessity obliged to acquiesce in this,
or else to be left alone, and give up the country to the barbarians.
He therefore kept the soldiers together, without making any further
attempt to force them, or lead them out to battle, for he was well
content if they would stay with him, and he allowed Cappadocia to be
ravaged by Tigranes, and Mithridates to resume his arrogance, as to
whom he had written to the Senate, to inform them that he was
completely subdued; and the commissioners[418] were now with him who
had been sent to settle the affairs of Pontus, on the supposition that
the country was completely in the power of the Romans. Indeed, the
commissioners were now witnesses that Lucullus was not his own master,
but was treated with contumely and insult by the soldiers, who carried
their audacity towards their commander so far, that, at the close of
the summer, they put on their armour, and drawing their swords,
challenged to battle the enemy who were no longer there, but had
already moved off. After uttering the war shout, and flourishing their
swords in the air, they left the camp, declaring that the time was up
which they had agreed to stay with Lucullus. The rest of the soldiers
were summoned by Pompeius by letter, for he had been appointed to the
command[419] in the war against Mithridates and Tigranes, by the
favour of the people, and through the influence of the demagogues;
though the Senate and the nobles thought that Lucullus was wronged,
inasmuch as he was not superseded in a war, but in a triumph; and it
was not the command, but the honours of the command that he was
compelled to divest himself of, and to surrender to others.

XXXVI. But it appeared a still greater wrong to those who were with
Lucullus in Asia, that Lucullus had not the power either to reward or
punish for anything that was done in the war; nor did Pompeius allow
any person to go to him, nor to pay any attention to the orders and
regulations that he was making in concert with the ten commissioners,
but he obstructed him by publishing counter edicts, and by the fear
which he inspired from having a larger force. However, their friends
agreed to bring them together, and they met in a village of Galatia,
where they saluted one another in a friendly manner, and each
congratulated the other on his victories. Lucullus was the elder, but
Pompeius had the greater reputation, because he had oftener had the
command, and enjoyed two triumphs. Fasces, wreathed with bay,[420]
were carried before both generals in token of their victories. But, as
Pompeius had made a long march through a country without water and
arid, the bays upon his fasces were withered, which the lictors of
Lucullus observing, in a friendly manner gave them bays out of their
own, which were fresh and green. And this the friends of Pompeius
interpreted as a good omen; for, in fact, the exploits of Lucullus
served to set off the command of Pompeius. But the conference[421]
resulted in no amicable arrangement, and they separated with increased
aversion towards each other. Pompeius also annulled the regulations of
Lucullus, and he took off with him all the soldiers with the exception
of sixteen hundred, whom he left to Lucullus for his triumph; and even
these did not follow him very willingly: so ill suited was the temper
of Lucullus, or so unlucky was he in securing that which, of all
things, is the chief and greatest in a general; for, if he had
possessed this quality, with the other many and great virtues that he
had, courage, activity, judgment, and justice, the Roman empire would
not have had the Euphrates for its limit, but the remotest parts of
Asia, and the Hyrkanian Sea;[422] for all the other nations had
already been defeated by Tigranes, and the Parthian power was not such
as it afterwards showed itself to be in the campaign of Crassus,[423]
nor so well combined, but owing to intestine and neighbouring wars,
was not even strong enough to repel the attacks of the Armenians. But
it seems to me that the services of Lucullus to his country were less
than the harm he did it in other things; for his trophies in Armenia,
which were erected on the borders of Parthia, and Tigranocerta, and
Nisibis, and the great wealth that was brought from these cities to
Rome, and the display of the diadem of Tigranes in his triumph, urged
Crassus to attack Asia, and to think that the barbarians were only
spoil and booty, and nothing else. But Crassus soon felt the Parthian
arrows, and so proved that Lucullus had got the advantage over the
enemy, not through their want of skill or cowardice, but by his own
courage and ability. This, however, happened afterwards.

XXXVII. When Lucullus returned to Rome, first of all he found that his
brother Marcus was under prosecution by Caius Memmius,[424] for what
he had done in his quæstorship at the command of Sulla. Upon Marcus
being acquitted, Memmius transferred his attack to Lucullus himself,
and endeavoured to excite the people against him, and persuaded them
not to give him a triumph, on the ground that he had appropriated to
himself much of the spoils, and had prolonged the war. Now that
Lucullus was involved in a great struggle, the first and most powerful
men, mingling themselves among the tribes, by much entreaty and
exertion with difficulty persuaded the people to allow Lucullus to
have a triumph;[425] not, however, like some, a triumph which was
striking and bustling, from the length of the procession, and the
quantity of things that were displayed, but he decorated the circus of
Flaminius with the arms of the enemy, of which he had a great
quantity, and with the royal engines of war; and it was a spectacle in
itself far from being contemptible. In the procession a few of the
mailed horsemen, and ten of the scythe-bearing chariots moved along,
with sixty of the king's friends and generals, and a hundred and ten
brazen-beaked ships of war also were carried in the procession, and a
gold statue of Mithridates six feet high, and a shield ornamented with
precious stones, and twenty litters loaded with silver vessels, and
two-and-thirty loaded with golden cups, armour, and money. All this
was carried on men's shoulders; but there were eight mules that bore
golden couches, and fifty-six carried silver in bars, and a hundred
and seven others carried silver coin to the amount of near two million
seven hundred thousand pieces. There were also tablets, on which was
written the amount of money that Lucullus had supplied Pompeius with
for the pirates' war, and the amount that he had paid to those who had
the care of the ærarium; and besides this, it was added that every
soldier received nine hundred and fifty drachmæ. After this Lucullus
feasted all the city in a splendid style, and the surrounding villages
which the Romans call Vici.

XXXVIII. After Lucullus had divorced Clodia, who was a loose and
unprincipled woman, he married Servilia,[426] the sister of Cato, but
neither was this a happy marriage; for he thus escaped only one of the
misfortunes that resulted from his union with Clodia, the scandal
about her brothers: in every other respect Servilia was as abominable
as Clodia and a licentious woman, and yet Lucullus was obliged to
bear with her from regard to Cato; but at last he put her away.
Lucullus had raised the highest expectations in the Senate, who hoped
to find in him a counterpoise to the overbearing conduct of Pompeius
and a defender of the aristocracy,[427] inasmuch as he had the
advantage of great reputation and influence; but he disappointed these
hopes and gave up political affairs, either because he saw that they
were already in a difficult position and not in a healthy state, or,
as some say, because he was satisfied with glory, and wished to fall
back to an easy and luxurious life, after his many contests and
dangers, which had not been followed by the most fortunate of results.
Some commend him for making such a change, whereby he avoided what had
befallen Marius, who, after his Cimbrian victories and that great and
glorious success, did not choose to dedicate himself to honour so
great and to be an object of admiration, but through insatiate desire
of glory and power, though an old man, entered into political warfare
with young men, and so ended his career in dreadful acts, and in
sufferings more dreadful than acts; and they say that Cicero also
would have had a better old age if he had withdrawn from public life
after the affair of Catiline, and Scipio after he had added the
conquest of Numantia to that of Carthage, if he had then stopped; for
there is a close to a political period also, and political contests as
well as those of athletes are censured when a man's vigour and prime
have failed him. But Crassus and Pompeius sneered[428] at Lucullus for
giving himself up to pleasure and extravagant living, as if a
luxurious life was not more unsuitable to persons of his age than
affairs of state and military command.

XXXIX. Now in the life of Lucullus, as in an ancient comedy, we may
read, in the first part, of political measures and military command,
and, in the last part, of drinking and feasts, and hardly anything but
revels, and torches, and all kinds of amusement; for I reckon among
amusements, expensive buildings, and construction of ambulatories and
baths, and still more paintings and statues, and eagerness about works
of this kind, all which he got together at great cost, and to this end
spent profusely the wealth which he had accumulated to a large and
splendid amount in his military command; for, even now, when luxury of
this kind has increased, the gardens of Lucullus are reckoned among
the most sumptuous of the imperial gardens.[429] But with respect to
his works on the sea-coast and in the neighbourhood of Neapolis, where
he suspended as it were hills by digging great tunnels,[430] and threw
around his dwelling-places circular pieces of sea-water and channels
for the breeding of fish, and built houses in the sea, Tubero the
Stoic,[431] on seeing them, called him Xerxes in a toga. He had also
country residences in the neighbourhood of Tusculum, and towers
commanding prospects,[432] and open apartments and ambulatories,
which Pompeius on visiting found fault with Lucullus, that he had
arranged his house in the best way for summer, but had made it unfit
to live in during the winter. On which Lucullus said, with a smile,
"You think, then, I have less sense than the cranes and storks, and do
not change my residence according to the seasons." On one occasion,
when a prætor was ambitious to signalize himself in the matter of a
public spectacle, and asked of Lucullus some purple cloaks for the
dress of a chorus, Lucullus replied, that he would see if he had any
and would give them to him; and the day after he asked the prætor how
many he wanted. The prætor said that a hundred would be enough, on
which Lucullus told him to take twice as many; in allusion to which
the poet Flaccus[433] has remarked, that he does not consider a man to
be rich, if the property that he cares not for and knows nothing about
is not more than that which he sees.

XL. The daily meals of Lucullus were accompanied with all the
extravagance of newly-acquired wealth; for it was not only by dyed
coverlets for his couches, and cups set with precious stones, and
choruses and dramatic entertainments, but by abundance of all kinds of
food and dainty dishes, curiously prepared, that he made himself an
object of admiration to the uninstructed. Now Pompeius gained a good
reputation in an illness that he had; for the physician had ordered
him to eat a thrush, and, on his domestics telling him that a thrush
could not be found in the summer season except at the house of
Lucullus, where they were fed, Pompeius would not consent to have one
got from there; but remarking to his physician, "What, if Lucullus
were not so luxurious, could not Pompeius live?" bade them get for him
something else that could be easily procured. Cato, who was his friend
and connected with him by marriage, was so much annoyed at his life
and habits that, on one occasion, when a young man had delivered in
the senate a tedious and lengthy discourse, quite out of season, on
frugality and temperance, Cato got up and said, "Won't you stop, you
who are as rich as Crassus, and live like Lucullus, and speak like
Cato?" Some say that a remark to this effect was made, but that it was
not by Cato.

XLI. That Lucullus was not merely pleased with this mode of living,
but prided himself upon it, appears from the anecdotes that are
recorded. It is said, that he feasted for many days some Greeks who
visited Rome, and that they, feeling as Greeks would do[434] on the
occasion, began to be ashamed and to decline the invitation, on the
ground that he was daily incurring so much expense on their account;
but Lucullus said to them with a smile, "It is true, Greeks, that this
is partly done on your account, but mainly on the account of
Lucullus." One day, when he was supping alone, a single course and a
moderate repast had been prepared for him, at which he was angry, and
called for the slave whose business it was to look after such matters.
The slave said, that he did not suppose that he would want anything
costly, as no guest was invited. "What sayest thou?" said Lucullus,
"didst thou not know that to-day Lucullus sups with Lucullus?" Now,
this matter being much talked of in the city, as one might expect,
there came up to Lucullus, as he was idling in the Forum, Cicero and
Pompeius, of whom Cicero was among his most intimate friends; but
between Lucullus and Pompeius there was some difference, arising out
of the affair of the command in the Mithridatic war, and yet they were
accustomed to associate and talk together frequently in a friendly
manner. Accordingly, Cicero saluted him, and asked him how he was
disposed to receive visitors, to which Lucullus replied, "Exceedingly
well," and invited them to pay him a visit. "We wish," said Cicero,
"to sup with you to-day, just in the same way as if preparation were
made for yourself only." Lucullus began to make some difficulty, and
to ask them to allow him to name another day; but they said they would
not, nor would they let him speak to his servants, that he might not
have the opportunity of ordering anything more than what was preparing
for himself. However, at his request, they allowed him just to tell
one of his slaves in their presence, that he would sup on that day in
the Apollo; for this was the name of one of his costly apartments.
This trick of Lucullus was not understood by his guests; for it is
said that to every banqueting-room there was assigned the cost of the
feast there, and every room had its peculiar style of preparation and
entertainment, so that when the slaves heard in which room their
master intended to sup, they also knew what was to be the cost of the
supper and the kind of decoration and arrangement. Now, Lucullus was
accustomed to sup in the Apollo at the cost of fifty thousand
drachmas, and this being the cost of the entertainment on the present
occasion, Pompeius and Cicero were surprised at the rapidity with
which the banquet had been got ready and the costliness of the
entertainment. In this way, then, Lucullus used his wealth,
capriciously, just as if it were a captive slave and a barbarian.

XLII. What he did as to his collection of books is worth notice and
mention. He got together a great number of books which were well
transcribed, and the mode in which they were used was more honourable
to him than the acquisition of them; for the libraries were open to
all, and the walking-places which surrounded them, and the reading
rooms were accessible to the Greeks without any restriction, and they
went there as to an abode of the Muses, and spent the day there in
company with one another, gladly betaking themselves to the libraries
from their other occupations. Lucullus himself often spent some time
there with the visitors, walking about in the ambulatories, and he
used to talk there with men engaged in public affairs on such matters
as they might choose; and altogether his house was a home and a Greek
prytaneum[435] to those who came to Rome. He was fond of philosophy
generally, and well disposed to every sect, and friendly to them all;
but from the first he particularly admired and loved the Academy,[436]
not that which is called the New Academy, though the sect was then
flourishing by the propagation of the doctrines of Karneades by Philo,
but Old Academy, which at that time had for its head a persuasive man
and a powerful speaker, Antiochus of Askalon, whom Lucullus eagerly
sought for his friend and companion, and opposed to the followers of
Philo, of whom Cicero also was one. Cicero wrote an excellent treatise
upon the doctrines of this sect, in which he made Lucullus[437] the
speaker in favour of the doctrine of comprehension[438] and himself
the speaker on the opposite side. The book is entitled 'Lucullus.'
Lucullus and Cicero were, as I have said, great friends, and
associated in their political views, for Lucullus had not entirely
withdrawn from public affairs, though he had immediately on his return
to Rome surrendered to Crassus and Cato the ambition and the struggle
to be the first man in the state and have the greatest power,
considering that the struggle was not free from danger and great
mortification; for those who looked with jealousy on the power of
Pompeius put Crassus and Cato at the head of their party in the
Senate, when Lucullus declined to take the lead, but Lucullus used to
go to the Forum to support his friends, and to the Senate whenever it
was necessary to put a check on any attempt or ambitious design of
Pompeius. The arrangements which Pompeius made after his conquest of
the kings, Lucullus contrived to nullify, and when Pompeius proposed a
distribution of lands[439] Lucullus with the assistance of Cato
prevented it from being made, which drew Pompeius to seek the
friendship of Crassus and Cæsar, or rather to enter into a combination
with them, and by filling the city with arms and soldiers he got his
measures ratified after driving out of the Forum the partisans of Cato
and Lucullus. The nobles being indignant at these proceedings, the
party of Pompeius produced one Vettius,[440] whom, as they said, they
had detected in a design on the life of Pompeius. When Vettius was
examined before the Senate, he accused others, and before the popular
assembly he named Lucullus as the person by whom he had been suborned
to murder Pompeius. But nobody believed him, and it soon became clear
that the man had been brought forward by the partisans of Pompeius to
fabricate a false charge, and to criminate others, and the fraud was
made still more apparent, when a few days after the dead body of
Vettius was thrown out of the prison; for, though it was given out
that he died a natural death[441] there were marks of strangulation
and violence on the body, and it was the opinion that he had been put
to death by those who suborned him.

XLIII. This induced Lucullus still more to withdraw from public
affairs; and when Cicero was banished from Rome, and Cato[442] was
sent to Cyprus, he retired altogether. Before he died, it is said
that his understanding was disordered and gradually failed. Cornelius
Nepos says that Lucullus did not die of old age nor of disease, but
that his health was destroyed by potions given him by Callisthenes,
one of his freedmen, and that the potions were given him by
Callisthenes with the view of increasing his master's affection for
him, a power which the potions were supposed to have, but they so far
disturbed and destroyed his reason, that during his lifetime his
brother managed his affairs. However, when Lucullus died, the people
grieved just as much as if he had died at the height of his military
distinction and his political career, and they flocked together and
had his body carried to the Forum by the young men of the highest rank
and were proceeding forcibly to have it interred in the Campus Martius
where Sulla was interred; but, as nobody had expected this, and it was
not easy to make the requisite preparations, the brother of Lucullus
prayed and prevailed on the people to allow the funeral ceremony to
take place on the estate at Tusculum, where preparations for it had
been made. Nor did he long survive; but as in age and reputation he
came a little after Lucullus, so he died shortly after him, a most
affectionate brother.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 315: The complete name of Lucullus was L. Licinius Lucullus.
The Licinii were a Plebeian Gens, to which belonged the Luculli,
Crassi, Murænæ, and others. Lucius Licinius Lucullus, the grandfather
of Plutarch's Lucullus, was the son of L. Licinius Lucullus, who was
curule ædile B.C. 202, and the first who gave nobility to his family.
This grandfather of Lucullus was consul B.C. 151 with P. Postumius
Albinus. He conquered the Vaccæi, Cantabri, and other nations of
Spain, hitherto unknown to the Romans. Appian (_Iberica_, c. 52) gives
an instance of his cruelty and perfidy in his Spanish wars. L.
Licinius Lucullus, the father, was prætor B.C. 103. In B.C. 102 he
went to take the command against the slaves who were in rebellion in
Sicily under Athenion. He conducted the war ill, and on his return he
was prosecuted for peculation and convicted. His punishment was exile.
It is not known what the offence was that Servilius was charged with.]

[Footnote 316: This Metellus was the conqueror of Jugurtha; he was
consul B.C. 109. See the Life of Marius, c. 7. His sister Cæcilia was
the wife of L. Licinius Lucullus, the father of Plutarch's Lucullus;
she was also the mother of Marcus the brother of Lucius Lucullus.]

[Footnote 317: See Life of Sulla, c. 6.]

[Footnote 318: This line is also quoted by Plutarch in his Treatise
'De Sera Numinis Vindicta,' c. 10.]

[Footnote 319: I should have translated the Greek word ([Greek:
dikologos] δικολόγος) "orator." Jurist in Plutarch is [Greek:
nomodeiktês] νομοδείκτης (Plutarch, _Tib. Gracchus_, c. 9) or [Greek:
nomikos] νομικός. Quintus Hortensius Ortalus, the orator, was a friend
and rival of Cicero, who often speaks of him. He began his career as a
pleader in the courts at the age of nineteen, and continued his
practice for forty-four years. (_Brutus_, c. 64, and the note in H.
Meyer's edition.)]

[Footnote 320: L. Cornelius Sisenna, a man of patrician family, was
prætor, B.C. 119, and in the next year he was governor of Sicily. He
and Hortensius defended C. Verres against Cicero. He wrote the history
of the Marsic war and of the war of Sulla in Italy, which he continued
to the death of Sulla. The historical work of Sallustius began where
that of Sisenna ended. Cicero (_De Legg_. i. 2) says that Sisenna was
the best historical writer that had then appeared at Rome. He wrote
other works also, and he translated into Latin the lewd stories of
Aristides the Milesian (Plutarch, _Crassus_, c. 32; Ovidius,
_Tristia_, ii. v. 443).

See Cicero, _Brutus_, c. 64, and the notes in Meyer's edition; Krause,
_Vitæ et Frag. Vet. Histor. Roman._ p. 299.]

[Footnote 321: It appears from this that the History of the Marsic war
by Lucullus was extant in the time of Plutarch. Cicero (_Ad Attic_. i.
19) mentions this Greek history of Lucullus.]

[Footnote 322: This Marcus was adopted by M. Terentius Varro, whence
after his adoption he was called M. Terentius Varro Lucullus. The
curule ædileship of the two brothers belongs to the year B.C. 79, and
the event is here placed, after Plutarch's fashion, not in the proper
place in his biography, but the story is told incidentally as a
characteristic of Lucullus. I have expressed myself ambiguously at the
end of this chapter. It should be "that Lucullus in his absence was
elected ædile with his brother." (Cicero, _Academ. Prior_. ii. 1.)]

[Footnote 323: See Life of Sulla, c. 13, &c.]

[Footnote 329: See Life of Sulla, c. 21.]

[Footnote 330: This was the consul L. Valerius Flaccus. See the Life
of Sulla, c. 20.]

[Footnote 331: Lektum is a promontory of the Troad, which is that
district of Asia Minor that took its name from the old town of Troja
or Troia, and lay in the angle between the Hellespont (the
Dardanelles), and the Ægean or Archipelago. It is fully described by
Strabo, lib. xiii.]

[Footnote 335: This is a place on the coast of the mainland, and east
of Pitane.]

[Footnote 336: Lucullus was consul B.C. 74, with M. Aurelius Cotta for
his colleague.]

[Footnote 337: See the Life of Pompeius, c. 20, and the Life of
Sertorius, c. 21.]

[Footnote 338: P. Cornelius Cethegus originally belonged to the party
of Marius, and he accompanied the younger Marius in his flight to
Africa B.C. 88 (Life of Marius, c. 40). He returned to Rome B.C. 87,
and in the year B.C. 83 he attached himself to Sulla after his return
from Asia and was pardoned. After Sulla's death he had great influence
at Rome, though he never was consul. Cicero (_Brutus_, c. 48), speaks
of him as thoroughly acquainted with all the public business and as
having great weight in the Senate.]

[Footnote 339: He is commemorated by Cicero (_Brutus_, c. 62) as a man
well fitted for speaking in noisy assemblies. He was a tribune in the
year of the consulship of Lucullus.]

[Footnote 340: This was L. Octavius, who was consul with C. Aurelius
Cotta B.C. 75.]

[Footnote 341: Q. Cæcilius Metellus Pius. See the Life of Sertorius.]

[Footnote 344: The sophists of Plutarch's time were rhetoricians, who
affected to declaim on any subject, which they set off with words and
phrases and little more. One of the noted masters of this art,
Aristides of Bithynia, might have been known to Plutarch, though he
was younger than Plutarch. Many of his unsubstantial declamations are
extant. Plutarch in his Life of Lucullus, c. 22, has mentioned another
of this class.]

[Footnote 345: The Romans carried on a thriving trade in this way in
the provinces. In Cicero's period we find that many men of rank did
not scruple to enrich themselves in this manner; and they were
unsparing creditors.]

[Footnote 346: The word ([Greek: telônai] τελώναι) which I have
elsewhere translated by the Roman word Publicani, means the men who
farmed the taxes in the provences. The Publicani at this period
belonged to the order of the Equites. A number of them associated
themselves in a partnership (societas) for the farming of the taxes of
some particular province. These associations had their agents in the
provinces and a chief manager (magister) at Rome. The collection of
the taxes gave employment to a great number of persons; and thus the
Publicani had at their disposal numerous places in the provinces,
which gave them great influence at Rome. (Cicero, _Pro Cn. Plancio_,
c. 19.) The taxes were taken at some sum that was agreed upon; and we
find an instance mentioned by Cicero (_Ad Attic._ i. 17) in which
their competition or their greediness led them to give too much and to
call on the Senate to cancel the bargain. The Romans at this time
derived little revenue from Italy, and the large expenditure had to be
supplied out of the revenue raised in the provinces and collected by
the Publicani. The Publicani thus represented the monied interest of
modern times, and the state sometimes required their assistance to
provide the necessary supplies.

It seems probable that the Publicani who farmed the taxes of a
province, underlet them to others; which would be one cause of
oppression. These Collectors ([Greek: telônai] τελώναι) are called
Publicans in the English version of the New Testament, where they are
no doubt very justly coupled with sinners.]

[Footnote 347: Appian (_Mithridat. War_, c. 71) states that
Mithridates invaded Bithynia, for King Nikomedes had just died
childless and left his kingdom to the Romans. Cotta fled before him
and took refuge in Chalkedon, a city situated on the Asiatic side of
the Thracian Bosporus opposite to the site of Constantinople. The
consul would not go out to meet the enemy, but his admiral Nudus with
some troops occupied the strongest position in the plain. However, he
was defeated by Mithridates and with difficulty got again into the
city. In the confusion about the gates the Romans lost three thousand
men. Mithridates also broke through the chain that was thrown across
the harbour and burnt four ships and towed the other sixty off. His
whole loss was only twenty men.]

[Footnote 348: See the Life of Sulla, c. 11. Mithridates was much
dissatisfied with the terms of the peace that had been brought about
by Archelaus, who fearing for his life went over to Murena, who was
left by Sulla in the command in Asia. At the instigation of Archelaus,
Murena attacked and plundered Comana in Cappadocia, which belonged to
Mithridates, and contained a temple of great sanctity and wealth.
Mithridates in vain complained to Murena, and then sent an embassy to
Rome. Appian considers this conduct of Murena as the commencement of
the Second Mithridatic War, B.C. 83. The Third commenced B.C. 74 with
the league of Mithridates and Sertorius. (Appian, _Mithridat_. 64-68;
Life of Sertorius, c. 24.)]

[Footnote 352: Persephassa, or Persephone, whom the Romans call
Proserpina, was the patron goddess of Kyzikus. Compare Appian
(_Mithridat. War_, c. 75).]

[Footnote 353: What he was I don't know. Kaltwasser translates the
word ([Greek: grammatistê] γραμματιστῇ) "the public schoolmaster;" but
he is inclined to take Reiske's conjecture [Greek: grammatei]
γραμματεῖ because the grammateus was an important functionary in the
Greek towns, and a "public schoolmaster" is not mentioned as an
ordinary personage at this period. But Kaltwasser has not observed
that [Greek: grammatistês] γραμματιστής signifies a clerk or secretary
in various passages (Herodotus, iii. 123, 128; vii. 100). If [Greek:
grammatistês] γραμματιστής could only signify a schoolmaster, it would
be necessary to alter the reading. One cannot suppose that the goddess
would reveal herself to a schoolmaster; or that a schoolmaster could
venture to announce that he had received the honour of such a
communication. When Romulus after his sudden disappearance again
appeared to assure the anxious citizens, Julius Proculus was selected
by him as the person to whom he showed himself; or Julius Proculus was
one of the few who could claim to have the story of such an appearance
believed. (Liv. i. 16.)]

[Footnote 354: I have kept the Greek word ([Greek: stêlê] στήλη), for
no English word exactly expresses the thing. It was a stone placed
upright, with an inscription on a flat surface, the summit of which
sometimes ended with an ornamental finish. There are several in the
British Museum.]

[Footnote 368: The great mountain region between the Black Sea and the
Caspian.]

[Footnote 369: The position of Kabeira is uncertain. Strabo (p. 556)
says that it is about 150 stadia south of the Paryadres range; but he
does not say that it is on the Lykus. It may be collected from the
following chapter of Plutarch that it was near the Lykus. Pompeius
made Kabeira a city and named it Diopolis. A woman named Pythodoris
added to it and called it Sebaste, that is, in Latin, Augusta, and it
was her royal residence at the time when Strabo wrote.]

[Footnote 370: The reign of Tigranes in Armenia began about B.C. 96.
Little is known of his early history. He become King of Syria about
B.C. 83, and thus he supplanted the kings, the descendants of
Seleukus. He lost Syria after his defeat by Lucullus, B.C. 69; and he
was finally reduced to the limits of his native kingdom by Pompeius,
B.C. 66. (See the Life of Pompeius, c. 23.)]

[Footnote 371: Some writers read Dardarii. The Dandarii are mentioned
by Strabo (p. 495) as one of the tribes on the Mæotis or Sea of Azoff.
Mithridates held the parts on the Bosporus. Appian (_Mithridat. War_,
c. 79) has this story of Olthakus, whom he names Olkades, but he calls
him a Scythian.]

[Footnote 373: _Phernakia_ or Pharnakia, as it is generally read, is a
town in Pontus on the coast of the Black Sea. It is generally assumed
that Pharnakia was the same as Kerasus mentioned by Xenophon in the
Retreat of the Ten Thousand, and the place being now called Kerasunt
seems to establish this. Arrian in his Periplus of the Euxine states
that it was originally named Kerasus. A difficulty is raised on this
point because Xenophon says that the Greeks reached Kerasus in three
days from Trebizond, and the country is difficult. Hamilton observes
(i. 250): "Considering the distance and the difficult nature of the
ground, over a great part of which the army must have marched in
single file, Xenophon and his 10,000 men would hardly have arrived
there in ten days." But it is more probable that there is an error in
the "three" days, either an error of Xenophon or of the MSS., than
that the site of Phernakia should have got the name of Kerasunt though
Kerasus was not there. "The town of Kerasunt, which represents the
Pharnakia of antiquity, is situated on the extremity of a rocky
promontory connected with the main by a low wooded isthmus of a
pleasing and picturesque appearance.--The Hellenic walls are
constructed in the best isodomous style. Commencing near the beach on
the west, they continue in an easterly direction over the hill,
forming the limits of the present town. Near the gateway they are
upwards of twenty feet high, and form the foundation of the Agha's
konak; a small mosque has also been raised upon the ruins of a square
tower; the blocks of stone, a dark green volcanic breccia, are of
gigantic size." (Hamilton, _Researches_, &c. i. 262, &c.)]

[Footnote 374: Appian (c. 82) calls him Bacchus; he tells the same
story. These Greek women of western Asia were much in request among
the Asiatic kings. (Compare Life of Crassus, c. 32). Cyrus the younger
had two Greek women with him when he fell at Cunaxa, and one of them
was a Milesian. (Xenophon, _Anab._ i. 10.)]

[Footnote 375: I have kept the Greek word. The description shows what
it was. The diadem was a mark of royal rank among the Asiatic nations.
Aurelian is said to have been the first Roman Emperor who adopted the
diadem, which appears on some of his coins. (Rasche, _Lex. Rei
Numariæ_.)]

[Footnote 379: See the Life of Sulla, c. 14.]

[Footnote 380: See the Life of Sulla, c. 26. Tyrannio is often
mentioned by Cicero. He arranged Cicero's library (_Ad Attic._ iv. 4
and 8), and he was employed as a teacher in Cicero's house (_Ad Quint.
Frat._ ii. 4).

In alluding to Tyrannio being manumitted, Plutarch means to say that
by the act of manumission it was declared that Tyrannio had been made
a slave, and the act of manumission gave Murena the patronal rights
over him. This Murena was the son of the Murena who is mentioned in
Plutarch's Life of Sulla (c. 17). Cicero defended him against a charge
of Ambitus or bribery at his election for the consulship, and in his
oration, which is extant, he speaks highly of him. This Murena was
Consul B.C. 62, the year after Cicero was Consul.]

[Footnote 381: This passage is very obscure. Some critics think that
Plutarch is speaking of torture. But it is more likely that he is
speaking of the debtors being in attendance at the courts and waiting
under the open sky at all seasons till the suits about the debts were
settled.]

[Footnote 382: This is the Centesimæ usuræ of the Romans, which was at
this time the usual rate. It was one per cent. per month, or twelve
per cent. per annum. Cæsar (Life of Cæsar, c. 12) made a like
settlement between debtor and creditor in Spain.]

[Footnote 383: P. Appius Clodius or Claudius belonged to the Patrician
Gens of the Claudii. He was a clever, unprincipled fellow, and the
bitter enemy of Cicero, whom during his tribunate he caused to be
banished. There is more about him in the Life of Cæsar, c. 10. He was
killed by T. Annius Milo.

This wife of Lucullus, named Clodia, had several sisters of the same
name, as usual among the Romans. (Life of Marius, c. 1.) The sister
who married Q. Metellus Celer, is accused of poisoning him.]

[Footnote 388: Compare Appian, _Mithridat. War_, c. 82.]

[Footnote 389: He is often mentioned by Cicero, _De Orat._ ii. 88, 90;
and elsewhere. He was celebrated for his powerful memory, and he is
said to have perfected a certain artificial system which was began by
Simonides.]

[Footnote 390: Though Amphikrates intended to say that Seleukeia was
small, it was in fact a large city. This Seleukeia on the Tigris was
built by Seleukus Nikator. It was about 300 stadia or 36 miles from
Babylon, which declined after the foundation of Seleukeia. In Strabo's
time, Babylon was nearly deserted and Seleukeia was a large city.]

[Footnote 394: Socius et Amicus: this was the title which the Romans
condescended to give to a king who behaved towards them with due
respect and submission. (Livius, 31, c. 11.)]

[Footnote 395: Lucullus appears to have crossed the Euphrates at a
more northern point than Zeugma, where the river was crossed by
Crassus. Sophene is a district on the east side of the river between
the mountain range called Masius and the range called Antitaurus: the
capital or royal residence was Carcathiocerta. (Strabo, p. 527.)]

[Footnote 396: The great mountain range to which this name was given
by the ancient geographers commences according to Strabo (p. 651) on
the south-east coast of Lycia. The name Taurus was not very exactly
defined, but it comprehended the mountain region which runs eastward
from the point above mentioned in a general parallel direction to the
south coast of Asia Minor; and the name was extended to the high lands
of Armenia east of the Euphrates. Its eastern limit was very vaguely
conceived, as we may collect from Strabo (p. 519).]

The town is mentioned by Tacitus (_Annal._ xv. 35) under the name of
Nisibis, and he places it thirty-nine Roman miles from Tigranocerta.
Nisibis is also the name in Ammianus Marcellinus. Dion Cassius (36, c.
6, 7) describes the siege and capture of Nisibis. This event belongs
to the year B.C. 68.]

[Footnote 413: Compare Dion Cassius (36, c. 16) as to the behaviour of
Lucullus. He was too strict a disciplinarian for soldiers who were
accustomed to licence; and he did not even attempt to win the love of
his men by kindness. The mutinous army that he could not control was
quiet and obedient to Pompeius.]

[Footnote 414: This is the same person who is mentioned in c. 5. The
Roman name is Quinctius, which is corrupted in the MSS. of Plutarch.
This Lucius was tribune of the Plebs B.C. 74, the year of the
consulship of Lucullus. In this chapter Plutarch calls him one of the
Prætors ([Greek: hena ton stratêgon] ἑνα τῶν στρατηγῶν), which
Kaltwasser has translated "one of the tribunes of the people."]

[Footnote 415: This, I think, is the sense of the passage, to which
Reiske gives a very different meaning. I have given the same meaning
that Kaltwasser and Coræs have. See the note in Schæfer's edition.]

[Footnote 416: Manius Acilius Glabrio, consul B.C. 67, was first
appointed to succeed Lucullus; but Pompeius contrived to get the
command given to himself B.C. 66. "Plutarch, who refers elsewhere to
the appointment of Glabrio (_Pomp._ c. 30) has not here (c. 33, 34)
sufficiently distinguished it from that of Pompey, which he has
anticipated. For Pompey was not appointed till the following year"
(Clinton, _Fasti Hellen._).]

[Footnote 417: Compare Dion Cassius, 35, c. 10, &c.; and Appian, c.
88, &c.]

[Footnote 418: When a country was conquered and it was intended to
make of it a Roman province, commissioners were sent out, usually
Senators, to assist the general in organizing the provincial
government. Compare Livius, 45, c. 17.]

[Footnote 419: Pompeius was appointed by a Lex Manilia, in favour of
which Cicero spoke in an oration, which is still extant, Pro Lege
Manilia. See the Life of Pompeius, c. 30.]

[Footnote 420: This is the Greek [Greek: daphnê] δάφνη, and the Roman
Laurus, which is incorrectly translated "laurel."]

[Footnote 421: Compare Life of Pompeius, c. 31, Dion Cassius, 36, c.
29. and Velleius Patercules, ii. 33.]

[Footnote 422: The Caspian Lake was sometimes so called from the
Hyrkani, who occupied the country on the south-east side of this great
lake.]

[Footnote 423: See the Life of Crassus.]

[Footnote 424: This Caius Memmius was tribune of the Plebs in the year
B.C. 66, in which year Lucullus returned to Rome. Memmius was not
satisfied with prosecuting M. Lucullus; he revenged himself for his
failure by debauching his wife, to which Cicero alludes in the
following passage (_Ad Attic._ i. 18): "C. Memmius has initiated the
wife of M. Lucullus in his own sacred rites. Menelaus (M. Lucullus)
did not like this, and has divorced his wife. Though that shepherd of
Ida insulted Menelaus only; this Paris of ours has not considered
either that Menelaus or Agamemnon should be free." Cicero is here
alluding to the opposition which Memmius made to the triumph of L.
Lucullus. Memmius was a man of ability, but of dissolute habits. He
was accused of bribery at the consular election, and being convicted,
retired to Athens. Several letters of Cicero to him are still extant.
Lucretius dedicated his poem to Memmius. See the Note of Manutius on
Cicero, _Ad Familiares_, xiii. 1.

Orelli (_Onomastic._ C. Memmius Gemillus) refers to Cicero, _Pro
Balbo_, c. 2, to show that this Memmius was quæstor under Pompeius in
his Spanish campaign. But according to Plutarch, a Memmius fell in
battle in this war (Life of Sertorius, c. 21).]

[Footnote 425: Lucullus triumphed B.C. 63, in the consulship of
Cicero. (Cicero, _Academ. Prior_, ii. 1.)]

[Footnote 426: Servilia was the half sister of M. Porcius Cato the
younger. Livia, the daughter of M. Livius Drusus, who was consul B.C.
112 and the sister of the tribune M. Livius Drusus B.C. 91, was
married to M. Porcius Cato, by whom she became the mother of M.
Porcius Cato the younger, or of Utica. She was divorced from Cato, and
then married Q. Servilius Cæpio, the brother of the Cæpio who was
defeated by the Cimbri. Some critics made Cæpio her first husband. She
had by Cæpio a daughter Servilia, who married L. Lucullus, and another
Servilia, who married M. Junius Brutus and was the mother of M. Junius
Brutus, one of the assassins of C. Julius Cæsar. Plutarch in various
passages clearly distinguishes these two women, though some critics
think there was only one Servilia. Cæsar was a lover of the mother of
Brutus, and he gave her an estate at Naples. (Cicero, _Ad Attic_, xiv.
21.)]

[Footnote 427: This is the word of Plutarch ([Greek: tês
aristokratias] τῆς ἀριστοκρατιᾶς), which he seems to use here like the
Roman "Nobilitas" to express the body of the Nobiles or Optimates, as
they were called by a term which resembled the Greek [Greek: aristoi]
άριστοι. (See Tiberius Gracchus, c. 10, notes.)]

[Footnote 428: The original is made somewhat obscure by the words
[Greek: hôsper ou] ὥσπερ οὐ, which introduce the concluding sentence;
it is not always easy to see in such cases whose is the opinion that
is expressed. Plutarch means to say that Lucullus thought that luxury
was more suitable to his years than war or affairs of state, and that
Pompeius and Crassus differed from him on this point. Compare the Life
of Pompeius, c. 48.]

[Footnote 429: These gardens in the reign of Claudius belonged to
Valerius Asiaticus. Messalina the wife of Claudius, coveted the
gardens, and Valerius, after being charged with various offences was
graciously allowed by the emperor to choose his own way of dying. In
these same gardens Messalina was put to death. (Tacitus, _Ann._ xi. 1.
37.)]

[Footnote 430: There is the tunnel near Naples, called Posilipo, which
is a Roman work, and is described by Strabo (p. 246); but its date is
unknown.]

[Footnote 431: Tubero the Stoic was Q. Ælius Tubero, who was Tribune
of the Plebs B.C. 133 and opposed Tiberius Gracchus. He was also an
opponent of Caius (Cicero, _Brutus_, c. 31, and Meyer's notes). But
this cannot be the contemporary of Lucullus, and Plutarch either means
Q. Ælius Tubero the historian, or he has mistaken the period of Tubero
the Stoic. Ruhnken proposes to read in the text of Plutarch
"historian" for "stoic," but it is better to suppose that Plutarch was
mistaken, about the age of the Stoic. The ownership of good sayings is
seldom undisputed. Velleius Paterculus (ii. 83) attributes this to
Pompeius Magnus. The allusion is to Xerxes the Persian, who dug a
canal through the flat isthmus which connects the rocky peninsula of
Athos with the mainland (Herodotus, vii. 22), which still exists.]

[Footnote 432: There is some corruption in the text; but the general
meaning is clear enough.]

[Footnote 433: This is the story which Q. Horatius Flaccus tells in
his Epistolæ, Lib. i. Ep. 6.]

[Footnote 434: This is one of many like indications in Plutarch of his
good opinion of his countrymen. Compare the life of Crassus, c. 8,
where he is speaking of Spartacus.]

[Footnote 435: Plutarch's allusion would be intelligible to a Greek,
but hardly so to a Roman, unless he was an educated man. A prytaneum
in a Greek city was a building belonging to the community, on the
altar of which was kept the ever-burning fire. In the prytaneum of
Athens, entertainments were given both to foreign ambassadors and to
citizens who had merited the distinction of dining in the prytaneum, a
privilege that was given sometimes for life, and sometimes for a
limited period. As the town-hall of any community is in a manner the
common home of the citizens, so Plutarch compares the house of
Lucullus, which was open to all strangers, with the public hall of a
man's own city.]

[Footnote 436: Plato established his school in the Academia, a grove
near Athens; whence the name of the place, Academia, was used to
signify the opinions of the school of Plato and of those schools which
were derived from his. Speusippus, the nephew of Plato, was his
successor in the Academy, and he was followed by Xenokrates, and other
teachers who belong to the Old Academy, as it is called, among whom
were Polemo, Krates, and Krantor. The New Academy, that is, the
philosophical sect so called, was established by Arcesilaus; who was
succeeded by several teachers of little note. Karneades, a native of
Cyrene, the man mentioned by Plutarch, was he who gave to the New
Academy its chief repute. Philo was not the immediate pupil of
Karneades. He was a native of Larissa, and during the war with
Mithridates he came to Rome, where he delivered lectures. Cicero was
one of his hearers, and often mentions him. Philo according to Cicero
(_Academ._ i. i) denies that there were two Academies. Antiochus, of
Askalon, was a pupil of Philo, but after he had founded a school of
his own he attempted to reconcile the doctrines of the Old Academy
with those of the Peripatetics and Stoics; and he became an opponent
of the New Academy. Antiochus was with Lucullus in Egypt. (Cicero,
_Academ. Prior._ ii. c. 4.) The usual division of the Academy is into
the Old and New; but other divisions also were made. The first and
oldest was the school of Plato, the second or middle was that of
Arkesilaus, and the third was that of Karneades and Kleitomachus. Some
make a fourth, the school of Philo and Charmidas; and a fifth, which
was that of Antiochus. (Sextus Empiricus, _Pyrrh. Hypot._ i. 220.)]

[Footnote 437: This is the Second Book of the Academica Priora, in
which Lucullus, Catulus, Cicero, and Hortensius arr represented as
discussing the doctrines of the Academy in the villa of Hortensius at
Bauli.]

[Footnote 438: Plutarch's word is [Greek: katalêpsis] κατάληψις, the
word that was used by the Academics. Cicero translates [Greek:
katalêpsis] κατάληψις by the Latin word Comprehensio. The doctrine
which Lucullus maintains is that the sensuous perception is true. "If
all perceptions are such, as the New Academy maintained them to be,
that they may be false or cannot be distinguished from what are true,
how, it is asked, can we say of anyone that he has come to a
conclusion or discovered anything?" (_Academ. Prior_, ii. c. 9.) The
doctrine as to the impossibility of knowing anything, as taught by
Karneades, is explained by Sextus Empiricus (_Advers. Mathematicos_,
vii. 159). The doctrine of the incomprehensible nature of things, that
there is nothing certain to be collected either from the sense or the
understanding, that there is no [Greek: katalêpsis] κατάληψις
(comprehensio), comprehension, may be collected from the passages
given in Ritter and Preller, _Historia Philosophiæ Græco-Romanæ_, p.
396, Academic Novi.]

[Footnote 439: Dion Cassius (37, c. 49) states that during the
consulship of Lucius Afranius and Q. Metellus Celer B.C. 60, Pompeius,
who had brought about their election, attempted to carry a law for the
distribution of lauds among his soldiers and the ratification of all
his acts during his command. This is the Agrarian Law which was
proposed by the tribune Flavius, but opposed by the Senate. (Cicero,
_Ad Attic._ i. 19.) Afranius was, if we may trust Cicero, a
contemptible fellow; and Metellus now quarrelled with Pompeius,
because Pompeius had divorced Mucia, the sister of Metellus, as Dion
calls her, for incontinence during his absence. Cicero says that the
divorce was much approved. Mucia was not the sister of Metellus; but
she was probably a kinswoman. The divorce, however, could only have
been considered a slight affair; for Mucia was incontinent, and
divorces were no rare things at Rome. The real ground of the
opposition of Metellus to Pompeius was fear of his assumption of still
further power. From this time Horatius (_Carm._ ii. 1, "Motum ex
Metello Consule civicum") dates the beginning of the Civil Wars of his
period. See Life of Pompeius, c. 46, and of Cato the Younger, c. 31.]

[Footnote 440: It is Brettius in the text of Plutarch, which is
evidently a mistake for Bettius, that is, Vettius. This affair of
Vettius cannot be cleared up. He had been an informer in the matter of
Catiline's conspiracy, and he had attempted to implicate C. Julius
Cæsar in it: which of the two parties caused him to be assassinated is
doubtful. This affair of Vettius is spoken of by Cicero, _Ad Attic._
ii. 24, Dion Cassius, 38, c. 9, Appian, _Civil Wars_, ii. 12. The
history of this affair of Vettius is given by Drumann, _Geschichte
Roms_, ii. 334, P. Clodius.]

[Footnote 441: Kaltwasser translates it "he put himself to death:"
perhaps the words may have either meaning.]

[Footnote 442: See the Life of Cicero, c. 31, and Life of Cato, c. 34.

Cicero was banished B.C. 58, and Cato was sent to Cyprus in the same
year. Lucullus probably did not survive beyond the year B.C. 56. He
was older than Cn. Pompeius Magnus, who was born B.C. 106.

The character of Lucullus may be collected from Plutarch. He was a man
of talent and of taste, a brave soldier, a skilful general and a man
of letters. Cicero in the first chapter of the second book of the
Academica Priora has passed a high eulogium on him. He was fond of
wealth and luxury, but humane and of a mild temper. He was no match
for the cunning of Pompeius, or the daring temper of Cæsar; and he was
not cruel enough to have acted with the decision which the troublesome
times required that he just lived to see. The loss of his History of
the Marsic War is much to be lamented. It is singular that Sulla's
Memoirs which he revised, and his own work, have not been preserved,
for we must suppose that copies of them were abundant; and they were
extant in Plutarch's time.

The history of the campaigns of Lucullus in Asia would have been
interesting. It is worth recording that we are indebted to him for the
cherry, which he brought from Cerasus (Plin. _Hist. Nat._ xv. 30) into
Europe; the name of the fruit still records the place from which it
was brought. As a collector of books, a lover of ornamental gardening
and parks stocked with animals, and a friend to all the arts and
sciences, Lucullus was of all the luxurious Romans the most
magnificent and the most refined. He left a son by Servilia, whose
name was probably Lucius. This son joined the party of Cato and M.
Brutus. After the battle of Philippi B.C. 42, he was overtaken in the
pursuit, and put to death at the command of M. Antonius. No children
of this son are mentioned.

Marcus, the brother of Plutarch's Lucius Licinius, was consul B.C. 73.
It is not known how long he survived his brother, but he died before
the commencement of the second Civil War (Vell. Paterc. ii. 49), that
which broke out between Cæsar and Pompeius B.C. 50.]

COMPARISON OF KIMON AND LUCULLUS.

II. Now with regard to their warlike operations, there can be no doubt
that both proved themselves to be consummate commanders, both by land
and by sea; yet, as we are accustomed to call those athletes who have
in one day been successful both in wrestling and in the pankratium by
the name of notable victors, so Kimon, who in one day won a victory
both by sea and by land, thus gaining a double triumph for Greece,
deserves to be given some place above all other generals. Moreover,
Lucullus was given the chief command by his country, but Kimon won for
his country the honour of commanding the other Greek states. Lucullus
found his country in command of allies, and by their aid overthrew the
enemy, but Kimon found his country acting under the command of others,
and by his own force of character both made Athens the leading state
in Greece and overcame the enemy, for he drove the Persians from the
sea, and persuaded the Lacedæmonians to resign their claims to
supremacy. If we are to believe it to be the greatest proof of ability
in a general to be loved and willingly obeyed by his soldiers, then we
see that Lucullus was despised by his soldiers, while Kimon was
esteemed and looked up to by his allies, for the soldiers of Lucullus
revolted from him, while the Greek states revolted from Sparta in
order to join Kimon. Thus the former was sent out in chief command,
and returned home deserted by his men, while the other, though sent
out to act as a subordinate under the command of others, ended by
returning as commander-in-chief of them all, having succeeded, in
spite of the greatest difficulties, in obtaining three great
advantages for his countrymen, namely, having delivered them from the
fear of their enemies, having given them authority over their
confederates, and established a lasting friendship between them and
the Lacedæmonians. Both commanders attempted an enormous task, the
conquest of Asia; and both were forced to leave their work unfinished.
Kimon was prevented by death, for he died at the head of an army and
in the full tide of success; while one cannot altogether think that
Lucullus was not to blame for not having tried to satisfy the
complaints of his soldiers, which caused them to hate him so bitterly.
In this point Lucullus and Kimon are alike; for Kimon was often
impeached by his countrymen, who at last banished him by ostracism, in
order that, as Plato said, they might not hear his voice for ten
years. It seldom happens that men born to command can please the
people, or have anything in common with them; because they cause pain
by their attempts to rule and reform them, just as the bandages of a
surgeon cause pain to the patient, when by their means he is
endeavouring to force back dislocated limbs into their proper
position. For this reason, methinks, neither Kimon nor Lucullus
deserve blame.

III. Lucullus accomplished by far the greater exploits of the two, as
he marched beyond the Mount Taurus with an army, being the first
Roman who ever did so, and also crossed the river Tigris, and took and
burned the royal cities of Asia, Tigranocerta, Kabeira, Sinope, and
Nisibis, in the sight of their kings. Towards the north, he went as
far as the river Phasis; towards the east as far as Media; and
southwards as far as the Red Sea and the kingdom of Arabia, subduing
it all to the Roman Empire. He destroyed the power of two mighty
kings, and left them in possession of nothing but their lives, forcing
them to hide themselves like hunted beasts, in trackless wastes and
impassable forests. A great proof of the completeness of Lucullus's
success is to be found in the fact that the Persians soon after
Kimon's death, attacked the Greeks as vigorously as if they had never
been defeated by Kimon at all, and defeated a large Greek army in
Egypt; while Tigranes and Mithridates never recovered from the
overthrow they sustained from Lucullus. Mithridates was so crushed and
broken in strength that he never dared to march out of his
entrenchments and fight with Pompeius, but retired to Bosporus and
died there; while Tigranes of his own accord came into the presence of
Pompeius naked and unarmed, and cast down his royal diadem at his
feet, not flattering him for the victories which he had won, but for
those for which Lucullus had triumphed. He was well pleased to be
allowed to resume the ensigns of royalty, and thereby admitted that he
had before been deprived of them. He, therefore, is to be held the
better general, as he is the better wrestler, who leaves his enemy
weakest for his successor to deal with. Moreover, Kimon found the
power of the Persians impaired, and their spirit broken by the series
of defeats which they had sustained from Themistokles, Pausanias, and
Leotychides, and was easily able to conquer men whose hearts were
already vanquished: whereas Lucullus met Tigranes when he was full of
courage, and in the midst of an unbroken career of victory. As for
numbers, one cannot compare the multitudes who were opposed to
Lucullus with the troops who were defeated by Kimon. Thus it appears
that from whatever point of view we regard them, it is hard to say
which was the better man, especially as heaven seems to have dealt so
kindly with them both, in telling the one what to do, and the other
what to avoid: so that it seems to appear by the testimony of the gods
themselves, that they were both men of a noble and godlike nature.

END OF VOL. II.
