cowardice and fear of the popular
demagogues, when he says:

    "An honest citizen indeed he was,
    And not a coward like to Nikias."

V. Nikias feared so much to give the mob orators grounds for
accusation against him, that he dared not so much as dine with his
follow citizens, and pass his time in their society. Nor did he have
any leisure at all for such amusements, but when general, he used to
spend the whole day in the War office, and when the Senate met he
would be the first to come to the house and the last to leave it. When
there was no public business to be transacted, he was hard to meet
with, as he shut himself up in his house and seldom stirred abroad.
His friends used to tell those who came to his door that they must
pardon him for not receiving them, as he was not at leisure, being
engaged on public business of great importance. One Hieron, whom he
had brought up in his house and educated, assisted him greatly in
throwing this air of mystery and haughty exclusiveness over his life.
This man gave out that he was the son of Dionysius, called Chalkus,
whose poems are still extant, and who was the leader of the expedition
to Italy to found the city of Thurii. Hiero use

war, Nikias induced Athens and Sparta to confirm the
peace by entering upon an alliance, which enabled them to deal with
the malcontents with more authority, and give them more confidence in
one another.

All these transactions greatly displeased Alkibiades, who was
naturally disinclined to peace, and who hated the Lacedæmonians
because they paid their court to Nikias and disregarded him. For this
reason, Alkibiades from the very outset opposed the peace, but
ineffectually at first. When, however, he observed that the
Lacedæmonians were no longer regarded with favour by the Athenians,
and were thought to have wronged them by forming an alliance with the
Bœotians, and not restoring to Athens up the cities of Panaktus and
Amphipolis, he seized the opportunity of exciting the people by
exaggerated accounts of the misdeeds of the Lacedæmonians. Moreover he
prevailed upon the people of Argos to send ambassadors to Athens to
conclude an alliance. As, however, at the same time ambassadors, with
full powers to settle all matters in dispute, came from Lacedæmon, and
in a preliminary conference with the Senate were thought to have made
very reasonable and just proposals, Alkibiades, fearing

that they
might create an equally favourable impression when they spoke before
the popular assembly, deceived them by solemnly declaring with an oath
that he would assist them in every way that he could, provided that
they would deny that they came with full powers to decide, saying that
by this means alone they would effect their purpose. The ambassadors
were deceived by his protestations, and, forsaking Nikias, relied
entirely upon him. Upon this Alkibiades brought them into the public
assembly, and there asked them if they came with full powers to treat.
When they said that they did not, he unexpectedly turned round upon
them, and calling both the Senate and the people to witness their
words, urged them to pay no attention to men who were such evident
liars, and who said one thing in one+ assembly and the opposite in
another. The ambassadors, as Alkibiades expected, were thunderstruck,
and Nikias could say nothing on their behalf. The people at once
called for the ambassadors from Argos to be brought before them, in
order to contract an alliance with that city, but an earthquake which
was felt at this moment greatly served Nikias's purpose by causing
the assembly to break up. W

ge, as the chief proof of his avarice,
the mode in which he got his money and the amount of his property.
Though he did not at first possess above three hundred talents, and
during his first consulship he dedicated the tenth part of his
property to Hercules,[8] and feasted the people, and gave every Roman
out of his own means enough to maintain him for three months; yet,
before the Parthian expedition, upon making an estimate of his
property, he found it amount to seven thousand one hundred talents.
The greatest part of this, if one must tell the truth, though it be a
scandalous story, he got together out of the fire and the war, making
the public misfortunes the source of his wealth; for, when Sulla took
the city, and sold the property of those whom he put to death,
considering it and calling it spoil, and wishing to attach the infamy
of the deed to as many of the most powerful men as he could, Crassus
was never tired of receiving or buying. Besides this, observing the
accidents that were indigenous and familiar at Rome, conflagrations,
and tumbling down of houses owing to their weight and crowded state,
he bought slaves, who were architects and builders. Having got these
slaves t

o the number of more than five hundred, it was his practice to
buy up houses on fire, and the houses which were adjoining to those on
fire; for the owners, owing to fear and uncertainty, would sell them
at a low price; and thus the greatest part of Rome fell into the hands
of Crassus: but, though he had so many artizans, he built no house
except his own; for he used to say that those who were fond of
building were ruined by themselves, without the aid of any opponent.
Though he had many silver mines, and much valuable land, and many
labourers on it, still one would suppose that all this was of little
value, compared with the value of his slaves: so many excellent slaves
he possessed,--readers, clerks, assayers of silver,[9] house-managers,
and table-servants; and he himself superintended their education, and
paid attention to it and taught them, and, in short, he considered
that a master was mainly concerned in looking after his slaves, who
were the living implements of domestic economy. And here Crassus was
right, if, as he used to say, it was his opinion that he ought to
effect everything by the instrumentality of slaves, and that he
himself should direct the slaves; for, we obse

ade. He was, indeed, the only friend of Crassus, who
always accompanied him when he travelled abroad; and he used to wear a
cloak,[13] lent him for the purpose, which on his return he was asked
to give back. Oh, the submission[14] of the man! for the poor fellow
did not consider poverty among the things that are indifferent. But
this belongs to a later period.

IV. When Marius and Cinna had got the upper hand, and it was soon
apparent that they would reinstate themselves in Rome, not for the
benefit of their country, but plainly for the destruction and ruin of
the nobles, those who were caught in the city were put to death: among
whom were the father and brother of Crassus. Crassus, being very
young, escaped immediate danger; but, seeing that he was hemmed in on
all sides, and hunted by the tyrants, he took with him three friends
and ten slaves; and, using wonderful expedition, made his escape to
Iberia, having been there before, when his father was Prætor,[15] and
having made himself friends. Finding all in great alarm and trembling
at the cruelty of Marius, as if he were close at hand, he did not
venture to make himself known, but sought refuge in a tract bordering
on the sea, be

a man of reputation who had collected a force by no
means contemptible. But he stayed no long time there; for he
quarrelled with Metellus, and then set out to join Sulla, by whom he
was treated with particular respect. When Sulla had passed over the
sea to Italy, he wished all the young men who were with him to aid him
actively, and he appointed them to different duties. Crassus, on being
sent into the country of the Marsi to raise troops, asked for a guard,
because the road lay through a tract which was occupied by the enemy;
Sulla replied to him in passion and with vehemence, "I give thee as
guards thy father, thy brother, thy friends, thy kinsmen, who were cut
off illegally and wrongfully, and whose murderers I am now pursuing."
Stung by these words, and pricked on to the undertaking, Crassus
immediately set out, and, vigorously making his way through the enemy,
he got together a strong force, and showed himself active in the
battles of Sulla. The events of that war, it is said, first excited
him to rivalry and competition with Pompeius for distinction. Pompeius
was younger than Crassus, and his father had a bad repute at Rome, and
had been bitterly hated by the citizens; but s

till Pompeius shone
conspicuous in the events of that period and proved himself to be a
great man, so that Sulla showed him marks of respect which he did not
very often show to others of more advanced years and of his own rank,
by rising from his seat when Pompeius approached, and uncovering his
head, and addressing him by the title of Imperator. All this set
Crassus in a flame, and goaded him, inasmuch as he was thus slighted
in comparison with Pompeius; and with good reason; Crassus was
deficient in experience, and the credit that he got by his military
exploits was lost by his innate vices,--love of gain and meanness;
for, upon taking Tudertia,[21] a city of the Umbri, it was suspected
that he appropriated to himself most of the spoil, and this was made a
matter of charge against him to Sulla. However, in the battle near
Rome,[22] which was the greatest in all the war, and the last, Sulla
was defeated, the soldiers under his command being put to flight, and
some of them trampled down in the pursuit: Crassus, who commanded the
right wing, was victorious, and, after continuing the pursuit till
nightfall, he sent to Sulla to ask for something for his soldiers to
eat, and to report

lending money, and by canvassing for candidates, and subjecting
himself to all kinds of scrutiny in conjunction with those who wanted
anything of the people, he acquired a power and reputation equal to
what Pompeius had got by his many and great military services. And the
result to each of them was something unusual; for, when Pompeius was
absent from Rome, his name and his influence in the State, by reason
of his military exploits, was superior to that of Crassus; but when
Pompeius was at Rome, he often fell short of Crassus in influence, for
his haughty temper and habitual pride made him avoid crowds and retire
from the Forum, and seldom give his aid to those who sought it, and
then not readily; his object being to keep his power at a higher
pitch, by exercising it only on his own behalf. But Crassus was always
ready to make himself useful, and he did not keep himself retired, nor
was he difficult of access, but he was always busy in everything that
was going on, and by the general kindness of his behaviour he got the
advantage over the proud bearing of Pompeius. In personal dignity, in
persuasive speech, and attractive expression of countenance it is said
they were both equally

fortunate. However, this rivalry did not hurry
Crassus into any personal enmity or ill-will, and though, he was
annoyed at Pompeius and Cæsar receiving greater honour than himself,
he never allowed this jealous feeling to be associated with any
hostility or ill disposition. It is true that when Cæsar was taken and
detained by the pirates, he cried out, "What pleasure you will have,
Crassus, when you hear of my capture!" But afterwards, at least, they
were on friendly terms, and, when Cæsar was going to Iberia, as
prætor,[24] and had no money in consequence of his creditors having
come upon him and seizing all his outfit, Crassus did not leave him in
this difficulty, but got him released, by becoming security for him to
the amount of eight hundred and thirty talents. When all Rome became
divided into three parties,--that of Pompeius, Cæsar and
Crassus,--(for Cato[25] had more reputation than power, and was more
admired than followed), the sober and conservative part of the
citizens adhered to Pompeius; the violent and those who were lightly
moved, were led by the hopes that they had from Cæsar; Crassus, by
keeping a middle position, used both parties for his purposes, and, as
he ver

games. Two hundred
of these resolved to make their escape; but their design being
betrayed, those who had notice of the discovery, and succeeded in
getting away, to the number of seventy-eight, took knives and spits
out of a cook's shop, and sallied out. Meeting on the way with some
waggons that were conveying gladiators' arms to another city, they
plundered the waggons, and armed themselves. Seizing on a strong
position, they chose three leaders, of whom the first was Spartacus, a
Thracian of nomadic race, a man not only of great courage and
strength, but, in judgment and mildness of character, superior to his
condition, and more like a Greek than one would expect from his
nation. They say that when Spartacus was first taken to Rome to be
sold, a snake was seen folded over his face while he was sleeping, and
a woman, of the same tribe with Spartacus, who was skilled in
divination, and possessed by the mysterious rites of Dionysus,
declared that this was a sign of a great and formidable power which
would attend him to a happy termination. This woman was at that time
cohabiting with Spartacus, and she made her escape with him.

IX. The gladiators began by repelling those who came ag

ainst them from
Capua and getting a stock of military weapons, for which they gladly
exchanged their gladiators' arms, which they threw away as a badge of
dishonour, and as barbaric. Clodius[28] the prætor was next sent
against them from Rome, with three thousand men, and he blockaded them
on a mountain which had only one ascent, and that was difficult and
narrow, and Clodius had possession of it; on all other sides there
were steep smooth-faced precipices. On the top of the hill there grew
a great quantity of wild vines, and the men of Spartacus cutting off
all the shoots that were adapted to their purpose, and, intertwining
them, made strong and long ladders, so that when fastened above, they
reached along the face of the precipice to the level ground, and they
all safely descended by them except one man, who stayed to take care
of the arms; and, when all the rest had descended, he let the arms
down, and, having done this, he got down safe himself. The Romans did
not know what was going on; and accordingly, when the gladiators
surrounded them, they were put in alarm by the surprise, and fled, on
which the enemy took their camp. Many of the herdsmen and shepherds in
those parts al

t the gladiators
being strong in numbers, and confident, would not listen to him, and
they went about ravaging Italy. The Senate were now no longer troubled
merely at the humiliation and disgrace that they suffered by the
revolt; but, moved by fear and the danger, they sent out both the
consuls[31] as to a war of the utmost difficulty and importance.
Gellius, suddenly falling on the Germans, who, by reason of their
arrogance and self-confidence, had separated from the troops of
Spartacus, destroyed the whole body; and after Lentulus had hemmed in
Spartacus with large armies, Spartacus, rushing upon them and joining
battle, defeated the legates and got all the baggage. Spartacus now
attempted to force his way towards the Alps; and Cassius[32] who "was
the governor of Gaul upon the Padus, met him with ten thousand men,
and a battle was fought, in which Cassius was defeated with great
lose, and with difficulty made his escape.

X. The Senate, on receiving this news, angrily bade the consuls keep
quiet, and they appointed Crassus to the command of the war, whose
reputation and popularity induced many of the nobles to serve under
him. Crassus took his station on the frontiers of Picenum

reated it with contempt; but when forage began to fail, and he
wanted to advance further into the interior, he discovered the lines
of Crassus; and as there was nothing to be got in the peninsula,
taking advantage of a night when there was a fall of snow and a wintry
storm, he filled up a small part of the ditch with earth, and wood,
and the branches of trees, and so carried over a third part of his
army.

XI. Now Crassus was afraid that Spartacus might form a design to march
against Rome; but he was encouraged by many of the followers of
Spartacus quitting their leader, in consequence of some disputes, and
encamping by themselves upon the banks of the lake Lucanis,[36] which
they say is subject to changes, at certain intervals becoming sweet,
and then again salt, and not potable. Crassus coming upon this band,
drove them from the lake; but he was prevented from cutting them to
pieces and pursuing them, by the sudden appearance of Spartacus, who
checked the flight. Crassus had, before this, written to the Senate,
to say that they ought to summon Lucullus[37] from Thrace, and
Pompeius from Iberia; but he now changed his mind, and made every
effort to put an end to the war before the

nd then he made his way towards Crassus himself, through many men,
and inflicting many wounds; but he did not succeed in reaching
Crassus, though he engaged with and killed two centurions. At last,
after those about him had fled, he kept his ground, and, being
surrounded by a great number, he fought till he was cut down. But,
though Crassus had been successful, and had displayed the skill of a
great general, and had exposed his person to danger, yet the credit of
the victory did not escape being appropriated to Pompeius; for those
who fled from the battle were destroyed by him, and Pompeius wrote to
the Senate that Crassus had defeated the slaves in the open field, but
he had cut up the war by the roots.[40] Now Pompeius had a splendid
triumph for his victory over Sertorius and his exploits in Iberia; but
Crassus did not venture to ask for the greater triumph; and even as to
the foot triumph called the ovation, which he did enjoy, it was
considered but a mean thing, and below his dignity that he had a
triumph for a servile war. But how the ovation differs from the other
triumph, and about the name, I have spoken in the 'Life of
Marcellus.'[41] XII. After these events, Pompeius was

t up on the rostra, and, coming
forward, told a dream which he had had. "Jupiter," he said, "appeared
to me, and bade me tell the citizens not to let the consuls lay down
their office before they have become friends." Upon the man saying
this, and the assembly bidding the consuls be reconciled, Pompeius
stood silent; but Crassus offering his right hand first, said,
"Citizens, I do not consider that I am humbling myself or doing
anything unworthy of me when I make the advance towards good-will and
friendship to Pompeius, to whom you gave the name of Magnus before he
had a beard, and voted a triumph before he was a senator."

XIII. These were the things worthy of commemoration in the consulship
of Crassus. But his censorship[44] passed over altogether without
results, and without any active measures; for he neither revised the
senate, nor inspected the equites, nor made a census of the citizens,
though he had for his colleague Lutatius Catulus, the mildest of the
Romans. But it is said that Crassus designed a shameful and violent
measure, to make Egypt tributary to the Romans, and that Catulus
opposed him vigorously, on which a difference arising between them,
they voluntarily laid d

own their office. In the affair of
Catiline,[45] which was a serious matter, and one that came near
overthrowing Rome, some suspicion, it is true, attached to Crassus,
and a man came forward to name him as implicated in the conspiracy,
but nobody believed him. However, Cicero, in one of his orations,
evidently imputed to Crassus and Cæsar participation in the plot; but
this oration was not published till after the death of both of them.
But in the oration on his consulship, Cicero says that Crassus came to
him by night and brought a letter[46] which contained information on
the affair of Catiline, as if his object was to establish the truth of
the conspiracy. Now Crassus always hated Cicero for this, but his son
stood in the way of his doing Cicero any open injury. For
Publius,[47] who was fond of oratory and of improving himself, was
much attached to Cicero, and went so far as to change his dress when
Cicero did at the time of his trial, and he induced the other young
men to do the same. At last he prevailed upon his father, and
reconciled him to Cicero.

XIV. When Cæsar returned from his province,[48] he made preparations
to be a candidate for the consulship; but, observing that

Crassus and
Pompeius were again at enmity, he did not choose by applying to one of
them for his help to have the other for his enemy, and he did not
think that he could succeed if neither of them assisted him.
Accordingly, he set about reconciling them, by continually urging upon
them, and showing that by their attempts to ruin one another they
would increase the power of the Ciceros, and Catuli, and Catos, who
would lose all their influence if they would unite their friends and
adherents, and so direct the administration with combined strength,
and one purpose. By persuasion and effecting a reconciliation, he
brought them together, and he formed out of the union of all three an
irresistible power by which he put down the Roman senate and the
people, though he did not make Pompeius and Crassus more powerful, one
through the other, but by means of the two he made himself most
powerful; for immediately on being supported by Pompeius and Crassus,
he was elected consul by a great majority. While Cæsar was ably
discharging the business of the consulship, Crassus and Pompeius, by
procuring for him the command of armies, and by delivering Gaul into
his hands, fixed him in a kind of acropo

XV. As soon as Crassus and Pompeius[49] returned to Rome, suspicion
was excited, and there was much talk through the whole city that their
meeting had been held for no good. In the Senate Marcellinus and
Domitius asked Pompeius if he intended to be a candidate for the
consulship, to which Pompeius replied that perhaps he should, and
perhaps he should not; being asked again, he said that he was a
candidate for the votes of the good citizens, but not a candidate for
the votes of the bad. It was considered that Pompeius had made a
haughty and arrogant answer; but Crassus said, in a more modest tone,
that he would be a candidate, if it was for the interest of the State;
if it was not, he would decline. This encouraged certain persons to
become candidates, among whom was Domitius. However, when Pompeius
and Crassus had openly declared themselves candidates, the rest were
afraid and withdrew; but Domitius was encouraged by Cato, who was his
kinsman and friend, and stimulated and urged him to stick to his
hopes, with the view of defending the common liberties; he said "it
was not the consulship that Pompeius and Crassus wanted, but a
tyranny; that their conduct showed they were not asking

for the
consulship, but aiming to seize on the provinces and the armies." By
such arguments, which were also his real opinions, Cato, all but by
force, brought Domitius to the Forum, and many sided with them. And
those who were surprised at the canvassing of Pompeius and Crassus
were no small number. "Why then do they want a second consulship? And
why do they wish to be colleagues again? And why will they not have
the consulship with other colleagues? There are many men among us who
are surely not unworthy to be colleagues with Crassus and Pompeius."
This alarmed the partizans of Pompeius, who now abstained from no
proceeding, however disorderly and violent; but, in addition to all
the rest, they placed a body of men to lie in wait and attack Domitius
as he was going down to the Forum, while it was still dark, with his
partizans, and they killed the man that held the light, and wounded
many, among whom was Cato. After putting the party of Domitius to
flight, and driving them back to the house,[50] Pompeius and Crassus
were proclaimed consuls. Shortly after, they again surrounded the
Senate-house with armed men, and, after driving Cato out of the Forum,
and killing some persons who

opposed them, they procured another five
years[51] of administration to be added to Cæsar's term, and the two
provinces of Syria and Iberia to be given to them. When the lots were
cast, Crassus got Syria, and Pompeius had Iberia.

XVI. The result of the lot was not universally disliked; for the
majority wished Pompeius not to be far from the city, and Pompeius,
who was much attached to his wife,[52] intended to spend his time
chiefly in Rome. Crassus showed by his joy, immediately on the falling
out of the lot, that he considered no greater good fortune had ever
befallen him, and he could scarcely keep quiet before strangers and in
public; to his friends he uttered many foolish and puerile expressions
quite inconsistent with his years and temper, for he had never before
shown himself in the least degree a braggart or arrogant. But now,
being mightily elated, and his head completely turned, he was not for
making Syria or Palestine the limit of his victories; but, designing
to make the exploits of Lucullus against Tigranes, and those of
Pompeius against Mithridates appear mere child's play, he extended his
hopes as far as to the Bactrians, and the Indians, and the external
sea. And

cted by alarm for
the whole army, and love of his son at the same time, he was urged by
one motive to go to his aid, and by the other not to go: but finally
he began to move in advance. In the mean time the enemy came up,
making themselves more formidable by their shouts and pæans, and many
of the drums again bellowed around the Romans, who were in expectation
of a second attack. The Parthians, carrying the head of Publius fixed
on a spear, rode close up to the Romans, and, displaying it
insultingly, asked who were his parents and family, for it was not
decent to suppose that so noble and brave a youth was the son of so
cowardly and mean a man as Crassus. The sight of this broke and
unstrung the spirit of the Romans more than all the rest of their
dangers; and it did not fill them with a spirit for revenge, as one
might have supposed, but with shuddering and trembling. Yet they say
that the courage of Crassus on that dreadful occasion shone forth more
brightly than ever before; for he went along the ranks, crying out,
"Mine alone, Romans, is this misfortune: but the great fortune and
glory of Rome abide in you, if your lives are saved, unbroken and
unvanquishcd: and, if you have an

est resemblance to Crassus,
Caius Paccianus, putting on a barbarian female dress, and being
instructed to answer as Crassus and Imperator to those who addressed
him, was conducted, seated on a horse, and in front of him trumpeters,
and some lictors rode upon camels; and there were purses[88] suspended
from the fasces, and, by the side of the axes, heads of Romans newly
cut off. Behind these followed courtesans of Seleukeia, singing girls,
who chanted many obscene and ridiculous things about the effeminacy
and cowardice of Crassus. All this was public. But Surena assembling
the Senate of Seleukeia,[89] laid before them certain licentious books
of the Milesiaca of Aristeides,[90] and, in this matter, at least,
there was no invention on his part; for they were found among the
baggage of Rustius,[91] and they gave Surena the opportunity of
greatly insulting and ridiculing the Romans, because they could not,
even when going to war, abstain from such things and such books. To
the Senate of Seleukeia, however, Æsopus[92] appeared to be a wise
man, when they saw Surena with the wallet of Milesian obscenities in
front of him, and dragging behind him a Parthian Sybaris in so many
waggons ful

ment
overtook Hyrodes for his cruelty, and Surena for his treachery. Not
long after, Hyrodes put Surena to death, being jealous of his
reputation. Hyrodes also lost his son Pacorus,[97] who was defeated
by the Romans in a battle; and having fallen into an illness which
turned out to be dropsy, his son, Phraates,[98] who had a design on
his life, gave him aconite.[99] But the poison only operated on the
disease, which was thrown off together with it, and Hyrodes thereby
relieved; whereupon Phraates took the shortest course and strangled
his father.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 5: Crassus belonged to the Licinia Gens. His name was M.
Licinius Crassus Dives. He was the son of P. Licinius Crassus Dives,
who was consul B.C. 97, and afterwards governor of the nearer Spain.
In B.C. 93 P. Crassus had a triumph. He was afterwards employed in the
Marsic war; and in B.C. 89 he was censor with L. Julius Cæsar, who had
been consul in B.C. 90.

M. Licinius Crassus, whose life Plutarch has written, was the youngest
son of the Censor. The year of his birth is uncertain; but as he was
above sixty when he left Rome for his Parthian campaign B.C. 55, he
must have been born before B.C. 115. Meyer (_Orator.

o good as that of Crassus, he had
only to buy a slave, as Horatius (1 _Epist_. i. 50) recommends, who
could tell him the name of every man whom he met. Such a slave was
called Nomenclator. If the nomenclator's memory ever failed him, he
would not let his master know it: he gave a person any name that came
into his head.]

[Footnote 13: The Greek is [Greek: stegastrou] στέγαστρου, 'something
that covers;' but whether cloak or hat, or covered couch, or sedan,
the learned have not yet determined.]

[Footnote 14: These words may not be Plutarch's, and several critics
have marked them as spurious. The Peripatetics, of whom Alexander was
one, did not consider wealth as one of the things that are indifferent
to a philosopher; the Stoics did.]

[Footnote 15: This is Plutarch's word; but the father of Crassus was
Proconsul in Spain. When Cinna and Marius returned to Rome, B.C. 87,
Crassus and his sons were proscribed. Crassus and one of his sons lost
their lives: the circumstances are stated somewhat differently by
different writers. (Florius, iii. 21; Appian, _Civil Wars_, i. 72.)

Drumann correctly remarks that Plutarch and other Greek writers often
use the word [Greek: stratêgos] στρατηγ

ός simply to signify one who
has command, and that [Greek: stratêgos] is incorrectly rendered
'Prætor' by those who write in Latin, when they make use of the Greek
historians of Rome. But Plutarch's [Greek: stratêgos] στρατηγός
sometimes means prætor, and it is the word by which he denotes that
office; he probably does sometimes mean to say 'prætor,' when the man
of whom he speaks was not prætor. Whether [Greek: stratêgos] στρατηγός
in Plutarch is always translated prætor or always Commander, there
will be error. To translate it correctly in all cases, a man must know
whether the person spoken of was prætor or not; and that cannot always
be ascertained. But besides this, the word 'Commander' will not do,
for Plutarch sometimes calls a Proconsul [Greek: stratêgos] στρατηγός,
and a Proconsul had not merely a command: he had a government also.]

[Footnote 16: So the name is written by Sintenis, who writes it
Paccianus in the Life of Sertorius, c. 9. Some editions read Paciacus;
but the termination in Paciacus is hardly Roman, and the termination
in Pacianus is common. But the form Paciacus is adopted by Drumann,
where he is speaking of L. Junius Paciacus (_Geshichte Roms_, iv. p.
52).

Drumann observes that the flight of Crassus to Spain must have taken
place B.C. 85, for he remained eight months in Spain and returned to
Rome on the news of Cinna's death, B.C. 84.]

[Footnote 17: The MSS. have [Greek: auran] αὖραν, 'breeze,' which
Coræs ingeniously corrected to [Greek: laupan] λαύπαν, 'path,' which
is undoubtedly right.]

[Footnote 18: If Fenestella died in A.D. 19 at the age of seventy, as
it is said, he would be born in B.C. 51, and he might have had this
story from the old woman. (Clinton, _Fasti_, A.D. 14.) See Life of
Sulla, c. 28.]

[Footnote 19: Malaca, which still retains its name Malaga, was an old
Phœnician settlement on the south coast of Spain. Much fish was salted
and cured there; but I know not on what ground Kaltwasser concludes
that the word 'Malach' means Salt. It is sometimes asserted that the
name is from the Aramaic word Malek, 'King;' but W. Humboldt (_Prüfung
der Untersuchungen über die Urbewohner Hispaniens)_ says that it is a
Basque word.]

[Footnote 20: The son of Metellus Numidicus. See the Lives of Marius
and Sertorius. Sulla lauded in Italy B.C. 83. See the Life of Sulla,
c. 27.]

[Footnote 21: This is the town which the Romans calle

ncing upon Rome with 120,000 foot soldiers. Spartacus sacrificed
three hundred Roman captives to the manes of Crixus, who had fallen in
the battle in which he was defeated; 20,000 of his men had perished
with Crixus.

Cassius was defeated in the neighbourhood of Mutina (Modena) as we
learn from Florus (iii. 20).]

[Footnote 33: Appian (i. 118) gives two accounts of the decimation,
neither of which agrees with the account of Plutarch. This punishment
which the Romans called Decimatio, is occasionally mentioned by the
Roman writers (Liv. ii. 59).]

[Footnote 34: Kaltwasser with the help of a false reading has
mistranslated this passage. He says that Spartacus sent over ten
thousand men into Sicily. Drumann has understood the passage as I have
translated it.]

[Footnote 35: If the length is rightly given, the ditch was about 38
Roman miles in length. There are no data for determining its position.
The circumstance is briefly mentioned by Appian (_Civil Wars_, i.
118). Frontinus (_Stratagem._, i. 5) states that Spartacus filled up
the ditch, where he crossed it, with the dead bodies of his prisoners
and of the beasts which were killed for that purpose.]

[Footnote 36: This lake, which

5 took place.
This Domitius, L. Domitius Ahenobarbus, was consul B.C. 54. In the
quarrel between Pompeius and Cæsar, he joined Pompeius, and after
various adventures finally he lost his life in the battle of Pharsalus
B.C. 48.]

[Footnote 50: The first 'house' ([Greek: oikia] οἰκία) is evidently
the house of Domitius. The second house ([Greek: oikêma] οἴκημα),
which may be more properly rendered 'chamber,' may, as Sintenis says,
mean the Senate-house, if the reading is right. Kaltwasser takes the
second house to be the same as the first house; and he refers to the
Life of Pompeius, c. 51, 52, where the same story is told.

In place of [Greek: oikêma] οἴκημα some critics have read [Greek:
bêma] βῆμα the Rostra.]

[Footnote 51: Appian (_Civil Wars_, ii. 18) says that Pompeius
received Iberia and Libya. The Romans had now two provinces in the
Spanish peninsula, Hispania Citerior or Tarraconensis, and Ulterior or
Bætica. This arrangement, by which the whole power of the state was
distributed among Pompeius, Crassus and Cæsar, was in effect a
revolution, and the immediate cause of the wars which followed.

Appian (_Civil Wars_, ii. 18) after speaking of Crassus going on his
Parthian exp

c. 33).]

[Footnote 54: C. Ateius Capito Gallus and his brother tribune P.
Aquillius Gallius were strong opponents of Pompeius and Crassus at
this critical time. Crassus left Rome for his Parthian campaign at the
close of B.C. 55, before the expiration of his consulship (Clinton,
_Fasti_, B.C. 54).]

[Footnote 55: We learn that Crassus sailed from Brundisium (Brindisi),
the usual place of embarkation for Asia, but we are told nothing more
of his course till we find him in Galatia, talking to old Deiotarus.]

[Footnote 56: Zenodotia or Zenodotium, a city of the district
Osrhoene, and near the town of Nikephorium. These were Greek cities
founded by the Macedonians. I have mistranslated the first part of
this passage of Plutarch from not referring at the time to Dion
Cassius (40. c. 13) who tells the story thus:--"The inhabitants of
Zenodotium sent for some of the Romans, pretending that they intended
to join them like the rest; but when the men were within the city,
they cut off their retreat and killed them; and this was the reason
why their city was destroyed." The literal version of Plutarch's text
will be the true one. "But in one of them, of which Apollonius was
tyrant, a hundre

_Parthica_, c.
29) is [Greek: telmasin entuchontes] τέλμασιν ἐντυχόντες, which
Sintenis has adopted. The common reading is [Greek: suntagmasin
entuchontes] συντάγμασιν ἐντυχόντες, which various critics variously
explain.]

[Footnote 77: In the old Latin translation of Guarini, the name Cn.
Plancus occurs in place of Megabacchus. Kaltwasser conjectures that
Megabacchus was a Greek, but the context implies that he was a Roman.
Orelli (_Onomastic._ C. Megaboccus) takes him to be the person
mentioned by Cicero (_Ad Attic._ ii. 7), which Gronovius had already
observed, and again by Cicero, _Pro Scauro_, c. 2.]

[Footnote 78: Censorinus was a cognomen of the Marcia Gens, and
several of the name are mentioned in the history of Rome; but this
Censorinus does not appear to be otherwise known.]

[Footnote 79: Carrhæ was a Mesopotamian town, south of Orfa or Edessa,
and about 37° N. lat. It is supposed to be the Haran of Genesis (xi.
31).]

[Footnote 80: Ichnæ was a town on the Bilecha, south of Carrhæ. Dion
Cassias (40. c. 12) calls it Ichniæ, and adds that Crassus before
taking Nikephorium had been defeated by Talymenus Eilakes. Eilakes is
probably a blunder in the copies of Dion; and it is

revent him from being taken alive. He adds that
the chief part of the army of Crassus made their escape.]

[Footnote 87: The story of molten gold being poured into the mouth of
the head of Crassus is given by Dion Cassius as a report. Floras (iii.
11) has the same story; and he says that it was the right hand of
Crassus which was sent to the king, as we might conjecture it would
be, if only one was sent.]

[Footnote 88: Kaltwasser asks, "Was this perchance intended as an
allusion to the avarice of Crassus, as the female dress was intended
to refer to his cowardice?" The probable answer is Yes.]

[Footnote 89: As this was a Greek town, it had a Greek constitution,
and was governed by a body which the Romans called a Senate. The
Senate of Seleukeia is mentioned by Tacitus (_Annal._ vi. 42):
"Trecenti opibus, aut sapientia delecti, ut Senatus: sua populo vis;
et quoties concordes agunt, spernitur Parthus."]

[Footnote 90: This Aristeides wrote lewd stories called Milesiaca, of
which there were several books. They were translated into Latin by the
historian L. Cornelius Sisenna, a contemporary of Sulla. It is not
said whether the original or the translation formed a part of the camp
fu

fortune seems
much the more honourable, when compared with Crassus's purchase of
confiscated lands and his habit of bidding for houses that were on
fire. Crassus too used to practise these openly, like a trade: while
he was also accused of taking bribes for his speeches in the Senate,
of defrauding the allies of Rome, of currying favour with great ladies
and assisting them to shield offenders from justice. Nothing of this
sort was ever laid to the charge of Nikias, who, however, was
ridiculed for giving money to common informers because he feared their
tongues. Yet this action of his, though it would have been a disgrace
to Perikles, or Aristeides, was a necessity for Nikias, who was
naturally of a timid disposition. Thus Lykurgus the orator excused
himself when accused of having bought off some informers who
threatened him. "I am glad," said he, "that after so long a public
life as mine I should have been at last convicted of giving bribes
rather than of receiving them."

The expenditure of Nikias was all calculated to increase his
popularity in the state, being devoted to offerings to the gods,
gymnastic contests and public dramatic performances. But all the money
he spent that w

ay, and all that he possessed was but a small part of
what Crassus bestowed upon a public feast at Rome for some tens of
thousands of guests, whom he even maintained at his own cost for some
time after. So true it is that wickedness and vice argue a want of
due balance and proportion in a man's mind, which leads him to acquire
wealth dishonestly, and then to squander it uselessly.

II. So much for their riches. Now in their political life, Nikias
never did anything bold, daring or unjust, for he was outwitted by
Alkibiades, and always stood in fear of the popular assembly. Crassus,
on the other hand, is accused of great inconsistency, in lightly
changing from one party to another, and he himself never denied that
he once obtained the consulship by hiring men to assassinate Cato and
Domitius. And in the assembly held for the dividing for the provinces,
many were wounded and four men slain in the Forum, while Crassus
himself (which I have forgotten to mention in his Life) struck one
Lucius Annalius, a speaker on the other side, so violent a blow with
his fist that his face was covered with blood. But though Crassus was
overbearing and tyrannical in his public life, yet we cannot deny

never obtained
one except in the servile war, and then only because all the other
generals, Pompeius, Metellus, and Lucullus, were absent. Yet at that
time Crassus was at the height of his power and reputation: but his
friends seem to have thought him, as the comic poet has it,

     "Most excellent, save in the battle-field."

And in his case also, the Romans gained no advantage from his
ambitious desire of command. The Athenians sent Nikias to Sicily
against his will, and Crassus led the Romans to Parthia against their
will. Nikias suffered by the actions of the Athenians, while Rome
suffered by the actions of Crassus.

IV. However, in their last moments we incline rather to praise Nikias
than to blame Crassus. Nikias, a skilful and experienced commander,
did not share the rash hopes of his countrymen, but never thought that
Sicily could be conquered, and dissuaded them from making the attempt.
Crassus, on the other hand, urged the Romans to undertake the war with
Parthia, representing the conquest of that country as an easy
operation, which he nevertheless failed to effect. His ambition was
vast. Cæsar had conquered the Gauls, Germans, Britons, and all the
west of Europe, and C

rassus wished in his turn to march eastward as
far as the Indian Ocean, and to conquer all those regions of Asia
which Pompeius and Lucullus, two great men and actuated by a like
desire for conquest, had previously aspired to subdue. Yet they also
met with a like opposition. When Pompeius was given an unlimited
command in the East, the appointment was opposed by the Senate, and
when Cæsar routed thirty thousand Germans, Cato proposed that he
should be delivered up to the vanquished, and that thus the anger of
the gods should be turned away from the city upon the author of so
great a crime as he had committed by breaking his word. Yet the Romans
slighted Cato's proposals and held a solemn thanksgiving for fifteen
days to show their joy at the news. How many days then must we imagine
they would have spent in rejoicing if Crassus had sent despatches
announcing the capture of Babylon, and then had reduced Media, Persia,
Hyrkania, Susa, and Bactria to the condition of Roman provinces. "If a
man must do wrong," as Euripides says of those who cannot live in
peace, and be contented when they are well off, they should do it on a
grand scale like this, not capture contemptible places like Sk

d fallen on them in the night. The barbarians were deceived by
the armour, and he found the gates open, and a number of men expecting
to meet friends and fellow-citizens, returning from a successful
expedition. Accordingly, most of them were killed by the Romans near
the gates, and the rest surrendered and were sold as slaves.

IV. This made the name of Sertorius known in Iberia; and as soon as he
returned to Rome he was appointed quæstor in Gaul upon the Padus at a
critical time; for the Marsic[112] war was threatening. Being
commissioned to levy troops and procure arms, he applied so much zeal
and expedition to the work, compared with the tardiness and indolence
of the other young men, that he got the reputation of being a man
likely to run an active career. Yet he remitted nothing of the daring
of a soldier after he was promoted to the rank of commander; but he
exhibited wonderful feats of courage, and exposed himself without any
reserve to danger, whereby he lost one of his eyes through a wound.
But he always prided himself on this. He used to say that others did
not always carry about with them the proofs of their valour, but put
them aside, at times, as chains and spears, and

crowns, while the
proofs of his valour always abided with him, and those who saw what he
had lost saw at the same time the evidences of his courage. The people
also showed him appropriate marks of respect; for, on his entering the
theatre, they received him with clapping of hands and expressions of
their good wishes--testimonials which even those who were far advanced
in age, and high in rank, could with difficulty obtain. However, when
he was a candidate for the tribuneship, Sulla raised a party against
him, and he failed; and this was, apparently, the reason why he hated
Sulla. But when Marius was overpowered by Sulla and fled from Rome,
and Sulla had set out to fight with Mithridates, and the consul
Octavius adhered to the party of Sulla, while his colleague Cinna, who
aimed at a revolution, revived the drooping faction of Marius,
Sertorius attached himself to Cinna, especially as he saw that
Octavius was deficient in activity, and he distrusted the friends of
Marius. A great battle was fought in the Forum between the consuls, in
which Octavius got the victory, and Cinna and Sertorius took to
flight, having lost nearly ten thousand men. However, they persuaded
most of the troop

ren, Sertorius unable to
endure any longer, speared the whole of them in their camp, to the
number of four thousand.[113] VI. But when Marius[114] had died, and
Cinna shortly after was cut off, and the younger Marius, contrary to
the wish of Sertorius, and by illegal means, obtained the consulship,
and the Carbos and the Norbani and Scipios were unsuccessfully
contending against Sulla on his march to Rome, and affairs were being
ruined, partly through the cowardice and laziness of the commanders,
and partly through treachery; and there was no use in his staying to
see things still go on badly, owing to the want of judgment in those
who had more power than himself; and finally, when Sulla, after
encamping near Scipio, and holding out friendly proposals, as if peace
was going to be made, had corrupted the army, though Sertorius had
warned Scipio of this, and given his advice, but without
effect--altogether despairing about the city, Sertorius set out for
Iberia, in order that if he should anticipate his enemies in
strengthening his power there, he might offer protection to such of
his friends as were unfortunate at Rome. Sertorius, having fallen in
with bad weather in the mountainous

rs in Iberia who were able to bear arms, and by
commencing the construction of all kinds of military engines and
building ships he kept the cities in check; showing himself mild in
all the affairs of civil administration, but formidable by his
preparations against the enemy.

VII. Hearing that Sulla was master of Rome,[116] and that the party of
Marius and Carbo was on the wane, and being in immediate expectation
of an army coming to fight against him under some commander, he sent
Julius Salinator to occupy the passes of the Pyrenees, with six
thousand heavy armed soldiers. Shortly after this, Caius Annius[117]
was sent from Rome by Sulla; but, seeing that the position of Julius
could not be attacked, he was perplexed, and seated himself at the
base of the mountains. But one Calpurnius, named Lanarius,
assassinated Julius, on which the soldiers left the summits of the
Pyrenees, and Annius, crossing the mountains, advanced with a large
force and drove all before him. Sertorius, being unable to oppose him,
fled with three thousand men to New Carthage,[118] and there embarking
and crossing the sea, landed in Mauritania, in Libya. His soldiers,
while getting water without due precautio

the slaughter of
two thousand of his Roman soldiers; Lucius Domitius,[135] proconsul of
the other Iberia,[136] was defeated by his quæstor; Thoranius,
another of the commanders of Metellus, who was sent with a force, he
destroyed; and on Metellus[137] himself, the greatest man among the
Romans in his day, and of the highest repute, he inflicted several
discomfitures, and brought him to such straits, that Lucius
Manlius[138] came from Narbo,[139] in Gaul, to his relief, and
Pompeius Magnus[140] was hastily despatched from Rome with an army;
for Metellus was perplexed at having to deal with a daring man, who
evaded all fighting in the open field, and could adapt himself to any
circumstances by reason of the light and easy equipment and activity
of his Iberian army; he who had been disciplined in regular battles
fought by men in full armour and commanded a heavy immovable mass of
men, who were excellently trained to thrust against their enemies,
when they came to close quarters, and to strike them down, but unable
to traverse mountains, to be kept always on the alert by the continual
pursuing and retreating of light active men, and to endure hunger like
them, and to live under the op

erally considered to owe his success to the old age and natural
tardiness of Metellus, who was no match for a daring man, at the head
of a force more like a band of robbers than a regular army. But when
Pompeius had crossed the Pyrenees, and Sertorius had met him in the
field, and he and Pompeius had mutually offered one another every
opportunity for a display of generalship, and Sertorius had the
advantage in stratagem and caution, his fame was noised abroad as far
as Rome, and he was considered the most able general of his age in the
conduct of a war: for the reputation of Pompeius was no small one; but
at that time particularly he was enjoying the highest repute by reason
of his distinguished exploits in the cause of Sulla, for which Sulla
gave him the name of Magnus, which means Great, and Pompeius obtained
triumphal honours before he had a beard. All this made many of the
cities which were subject to Sertorius turn their eyes towards
Pompeius, and feel inclined to pass over to him; but their intentions
were checked by the loss at Lauron,[151] which happened contrary to
all expectation. Sertorius was besieging this town, when Pompeius came
with all his force to relieve it. Ther

e pursuit. As soon as Sertorius
quitted the right wing to relieve the other part of the army,
Afranius[154] put to flight his opponents and drove them to their
camp, which, he entered with the captives, it being now dark, and
began to plunder, knowing nothing of the defeat of Pompeius, and being
unable to stop his soldiers from seizing the booty. In the mean time
Sertorius returned, after defeating the enemy who were opposed to him,
and falling on the soldiers of Afranius, who were all in disorder and
consequently panic-stricken, he slaughtered many of them. In the
morning he again armed his troops and came out to fight; but observing
that Metellus was near, he broke up his order of battle, and marched
off saying, "If that old woman had not come up, I would have given
this boy a good drubbing by way of lesson, and have sent him back to
Rome."

XX. About this time Sertorius was much dispirited, because that
deer[155] of his could nowhere be found; for he was thus deprived of a
great means of cheering the barbarians, who then particularly required
consolation. It happened that some men, who were rambling about at
night for other purposes, fell in with the deer and caught it, for
they

d barbarians escape, and allowed
Sertorius to collect a fresh army. It was got together by Sertorius
sending officers to the cities, and giving orders that when they had
collected a good body of men, they should dispatch a messenger to him.
When the messenger came, he broke through the besiegers without any
difficulty and joined his troops; and now he again advanced against
the enemy in great force, and began to cut off their land supplies by
ambuscades, and hemming them in, and showing himself at every point,
inasmuch as his attacks were made with great expedition; and he cut
off all their maritime supplies by occupying the coast with his
piratical vessels, so that the generals opposed to him were obliged to
separate, one to march off into Gaul, and Pompeius to winter among the
Vaccæi[157] in great distress for want of supplies, and to write to
the Senate, that he would lead his army out of Iberia, if they did not
send him money, for he had spent all his own in defence of Italy.
There was great talk in Rome that Sertorius would come to Italy before
Pompeius[158] to such difficulties did Sertorius, by his military
abilities, reduce the first and ablest of the generals of that age.

XXII. Metellus also showed, that he feared the man and thought he was
powerful; for he made proclamation, that if any Roman killed Sertorius
he would give him a hundred talents of silver and twenty thousand
jugera of land; and, if he was an exile, permission to return, to
Rome: thus declaring that he despaired of being able to defeat
Sertorius in the field, and therefore would purchase his life by
treachery. Besides this, Metellus was so elated by a victory which on
one occasion he gained over Sertorius, and so well pleased with his
success, that he was proclaimed Imperator[159] and the cities received
him in his visits to them with sacrifices and altars. It is also said,
that he allowed chaplets to be placed on his head, and accepted
invitations to sumptuous feasts, at which he wore a triumphal vest;
and Victories[160] which were contrived to move by machinery,
descended and distributed golden trophies and crowns, and companies of
youths and women sang epinician hymns in honour of him. For this he
was with good reason ridiculed, for that after calling Sertorius a
runaway slave of Sulla, and a remnant of the routed party of Carbo, he
was so puffed up and transported with delight b

ecause he had gained an
advantage over Sertorius, who had been compelled to retire. But it was
a proof of the magnanimous character of Sertorius, first, that he gave
the name of Senate to the Senators who fled from Rome and joined him,
and that he appointed quæstors and generals from among them, and
arranged everything of this kind according to Roman usage; and next,
that though he availed himself of the arms, the money and the cities
of the Iberians, he never yielded to them one *tittle of the Roman
supremacy, but he appointed Romans to be their generals and
commanders, considering that he was recovering freedom for the Romans,
and was not strengthening the Iberians against the Romans; for
Sertorius loved his country and had a great desire to return home.
Notwithstanding this, in his reverses he behaved like a brave man, and
never humbled himself before his enemies; and after his victories he
would send to Metellus and to Pompeius, and declare that he was ready
to lay down his arms and to live in a private station, if he might be
allowed to return home; for, he said, he would rather be the obscurest
citizen in Rome than an exile from his country, though he were
proclaimed supreme

fall that he
had from Sulla, as it were, to a second contest, had again attacked
Asia, and the fame of Sertorius was great, and had gone abroad to all
parts, and those who sailed from the West had filled the Pontus with
the reports about him, as if with so many foreign wares, Mithridates
was moved to send an embassy to him, being urged thereto mainly by the
fulsome exaggerations of his flatterers, who compared Sertorius to
Hannibal and Mithridates to Pyrrhus, and said that if the Romans were
attacked on both sides, they could not hold out against such great
abilities and powers combined, when the most expert of commanders had
joined the greatest of kings. Accordingly, Mithridates sent
ambassadors to Iberia, with letters to Sertorius and proposals. On his
part he offered to supply money and ships for the war, and he asked
from Sertorius a confirmation of his title to the whole of Asia, which
he had given up to the Romans pursuant to the treaty made with Sulla.
Sertorius assembled a council, which he called a senate, and all the
members advised to accept the king's proposal, and to be well content
with it; they said the king only asked of them a name and an empty
answer touching thi

of Sertorius. Perpenna encouraged
this feeling, being urged by the empty pride of high birth to aspire
to the supreme command, and he secretly held treasonable language to
those who were favourable to his designs. "What evil dæmon," he would
say, "has got hold of us, and carried us from bad to worse--us who did
not brook to stay at home and do the bidding of Sulla, though in a
manner he was lord of all the earth and sea at once, but coming here
with ill luck, in order to live free, have voluntarily become slaves
by making ourselves the guards of Sertorius in his exile, and while we
are called a senate, a name jeered at by all who hear it, we submit to
insults, and orders, and sufferings as great as the Iberians and
Lusitanians endure." Their minds filled with such suggestions as
these, the majority did not, indeed, openly desert Sertorius, for they
feared his power, but they secretly damaged all his measures, and they
oppressed the barbarians by severe treatment and exactions, on the
pretext that it was by the order of Sertorius. This caused revolts and
disturbances in the cities; and those who were sent to settle and
pacify these outbreaks returned after causing more wars, and
inc

e at Rome, in which
Sertorius was invited to Italy, and was assured that there were many
who were desirous to change the present settlement of affairs, and to
alter the constitution. Now Pompeius, by behaving on this occasion,
not like a young man, but one whose understanding was well formed and
disciplined, relieved Rome from great dangers and revolutions. He got
together all those letters, and all the papers of Sertorius, and burnt
them, without either reading them himself or letting any one else read
them; and he immediately put Perpenna to death, through fear that
there might be defection and disturbance if the names were
communicated to others. Of the fellow-conspirators of Perpenna, some
were brought to Pompeius, and put to death; and others, who fled to
Libya, were pierced by the Moorish spears. Not one escaped, except
Aufidius, the rival of Manlius, and this happened, either because he
escaped notice, or nobody took any trouble about him, and he lived to
old age, in some barbarian village, in poverty and contempt.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 101: If this is obscure, the fault is Plutarch's. His word
for Fortune is [Greek: tuchê] τύχη which he has often used in the Life
of Sulla.

fe of Marius, c. 41.]

[Footnote 113: The same story is told in the Life of Marius, c. 44,
where it is stated that Cinna and Sertorius combined to put these
scoundrels out of the way; but the number that were massacred is not
stated there.]

[Footnote 114: Compare the Life of Marius, c. 45, and of Sulla, c. 28,
&c. Cinna was murdered by his soldiers two years after the death of
Marius, and in his fourth consulship, B.C. 84. The younger Marius was
Consul in B.C. 82, with Cn. Papirius Carbo for his colleague. This was
Carbo's third consulship. According to Plutarch, Sertorius left Italy
after the younger Marius was consul, and therefore not earlier than
B.C. 82, unless we understand the passage in Plutarch as referring to
the election of Marius, and not to the commencement of his consulship.
Appian (_Civil Wars_, i. 86) places the departure of Sertorius in the
year B.C. 83.]

[Footnote 115: Sertorius had not been Consul, and therefore he was not
now Proconsul. It is true that a man, who had not been Consul, might
receive the government of a Province with the title of Proconsul. (See
c. 7.) Sertorius may have assumed the title.]

[Footnote 116: If Sertorius stayed at Rome till the you

ucullus, c. 37.]

[Footnote 120: The two islands of Yviça or Ibiça and Formentera, which
belong to the Balearic group, were sometimes comprehended under the
name of the Pityussæ or the Pine Islands (Strabo, 167, ed. Casaub.).
The Greeks and Romans called Yviça, Ebusus. Iviça is hilly, and the
high tracts are well covered with pine and fir.]

[Footnote 121: This is the old name of the Straits of Gibraltar, which
is still retained in the modern form Cadiz. Gadeira, which the Romans
called Gades, was an old Phœnician town, on the island of Leon, where
Cadiz now stands. Strabo (p. 168, ed. Casaub.) says that Gades in his
time (the beginning of the reign of Tiberius) was not inferior in
population to any city except Rome, and was a place of great trade, as
it is now.]

[Footnote 122: This river, now the Guadalquivir, gave the name of
Bætica to one of the three provinces into which the Spanish Peninsula
was ultimately divided by the Romans for the purposes of
administration.]

[Footnote 123: This was the name for so much of the ocean that washes
the west coast of Europe and Africa as the Greeks and Romans were
acquainted with. The Greeks and Romans had no name for the
Mediterranean.]

[F

adings in Sintenis: his name was L. Manilius.]

[Footnote 139: I should rather have translated it "Gaul about Narbo."
Plutarch means the Roman Province in Gaul, which was called
Narbonensis, from the town of Narbo Martius.]

[Footnote 140: Commonly called Pompey the Great, whose name occurs in
the Lives of Sulla, Lucullus, and Crassus. Plutarch has written his
Life at length.]

[Footnote 141: Probably the philosopher and pupil of Aristotle.]

[Footnote 142: Some writers would connect this name of a people with
Langobriga, the name of a place. There were two places of the name, it
is said, and one is placed near the mouth of the Douro. It is useless
to attempt to fix the position of the Langobritæ from what Plutarch
has said.]

[Footnote 143: Or Aquinus or Aquilius. Cornelius Aquinus was his
name.]

[Footnote 144: Osca was a town in the north-east of Spain, probably
Huesca in Aragon. Mannert observes that this school must have greatly
contributed to fix the Latin language in Spain. Spain however already
contained Roman settlers, and at a later period it contained numerous
Roman colonies: in fact the Peninsula was completely Romanized, of
which the Spanish language and the establishm

the
death of Sulla, and was like M. Lepidus driven from Rome (Life of
Sulla, c. 34, Notes).]

[Footnote 148: This is the Ebro, which the Romans called Iberus, the
large river which flows in a south-east direction and enters the
Mediterranean.

It seems that Plutarch here means the nations between the Ebro and the
Pyrenees, or the modern Aragon, Navarre, and Catalonia.]

[Footnote 149: The story is told by Frontinus, _Stratagemata_, i. 10,
as Kaltwasser observes, and again, in iv. 7, in the very same words.
It has been often remarked that Horatius probably alludes to this
story (ii. _Epist._ I, 45).]

[Footnote 150: The Tagonius is either the Tagus (Tajo), or a branch of
that large river, on the banks of which the Carpetani are placed by
geographers, who also mark Caraca, a position on the Henares, a branch
of the Tagus. If Caraca represents the country of the Charicatani, the
Tagonius is the Nares or Henares, on which stood Complutum, the modern
Alcalá de Henarea. But all this is merely conjecture.]

[Footnote 151: Lauron is placed near the coast, and near the outlet of
the Sucro river, the modern Xucar. There was also a town Sucro near
the mouth of the Sucro. Appian (_Civil Wars_

Africa
B.C. 46, and after the defeat he attempted to escape into Mauritania,
but was caught and given up to Cæsar, and shortly afterwards put to
death by the soldiers.]

[Footnote 155: Appian (_Civil Wars_, i. 110) has the same story about
the dear being found.]

[Footnote 156: Seguntum, or Saguntia, as it is written in Appian (i.
110). It is not certain what place is meant. Some critics would read
"in the plains of the Saguntini," by which might be meant the
neighbourhood of Saguntum, a town on the east coast between the mouths
of the Ebro and the Xucar, which was taken by Hannibal in the second
Punic War (Liv. 21, c. 15). The maps place a Segontia on the Tagonius,
another on the Salo (Xalon), a branch of the Ebro, and a Saguntia in
the country of the Vaccæi on the northern branch of the Douro.
Pompeius in his letter to the Senate speaks of the capture of the camp
of Sertorius near Sucro, his defeat on the Durius, and the capture of
Valentia. If the Durius be the Douro, this Segontia may be one of the
towns called Segontia in the north-west of Spain. But the Durius may
be the Turia, the river of Valentia, and Segontia may be Saguntum. The
fact of Pompeius wintering among the Vaccæ

i is perhaps in favour of a
north-west Segontia; but still I think that Saguntum was the
battle-field. This battle is mentioned by Appian (_Civil Wars_, i.
110), who says that Pompeius lost six thousand men, but that Metellus
defeated Perperua, who lost about five thousand men.]

[Footnote 157: The Vaccæi occupied part of the country immediately
north of the Durius (Douro); but the limits cannot be accurately
defined.]

[Footnote 158: Compare the Life of Lucullus, c. 5, and the Life of
Crassus, c. 11. The letter of Pompeius to the Senate is in the third
book of the Fragments of the Roman History of Sallustius. The letter
concludes with the following words, which Plutarch had apparently
read: "Ego non rem familiarem modo, verum etiam fidem consumpsi.
Reliqui vos estis, qui nisi subvenitis, invito et praedicente me,
exercitus hinc et cum eo omne bellum Hispaniae in Italiam
transgredientur."]

[Footnote 159: This appears to be the event which is described in the
fragment of the Second Book of the History of Sallustius, which is
preserved by Macrobius, _Saturnalia_, ii. 9, in the chapter "De
Luxu."]

[Footnote 160: Compare the Life of Sulla, c. 11.]

[Footnote 161: See the Life of Sull

s grounds, for a period of more than
ten months, at the end of which Leotychides was born.

IV. Having been raised to the throne on those grounds, Agesilaus at
the same time acquired the large property left by the late king Agis,
as Leotychides was declared illegitimate and driven into exile. As his
own mother's family were respectable, but very poor, he distributed
half this property among them, thus making sure of their good will and
favour, and removing any jealousy which they might feel at his
elevation. Moreover, as Xenophon tells us, he gained the greatest
influence by always deferring to the wishes of his country, and thus
was really enabled to act exactly as he pleased. The whole power of
the state was at that time vested in the Ephors and the Senate of
Elders, of whom the Ephors are elected every year, while the Elders
sit for life. These two bodies were intended as a check upon the power
of the kings, who would otherwise have been absolute, as has been
explained in the Life of Lykurgus. Between these magistrates and the
kings there was generally a bad understanding; but Agesilaus adopted
an opposite line of conduct. He never attempted to oppose or thwart
the Ephors or the

Senate, and even showed a marked deference to them,
referring the initiative of all state affairs to them, hurrying into
their presence when summoned, and rising from his royal throne
whenever they appeared, while he presented each senator, on his
election, with a cloak and an ox, to congratulate him on joining the
Senate. Thus he appeared to exalt the power of the Ephors and to court
their favour, but he himself was by far the greatest gainer, as his
own personal influence was greatly increased, and the power of the
crown much strengthened by the general good will which he inspired.

V. In his dealings with his fellow-citizens he is more to be praised
as an enemy than as a friend; for he would not act unjustly to injure
his enemies, but he sometimes disregarded justice in the interests of
his friends. He was of too generous a nature to refrain from
applauding even his enemies when they deserved it, but could not bear
to reproach his friends for their faults, which he delighted to share
with them, and to extricate them from the consequences, for he thought
nothing disgraceful if done to serve a friend.[174] He was also ever
ready to forgive and assist those with whom he had been a

nquer their enemies, that they only sacrificed a cock to the
gods, while those who had won a victory never boasted of it, and those
who heard of it expressed no extravagant delight at the news. When the
Ephors heard of the battle at Mantinea, which is mentioned by
Thucydides in his history, they gave the messenger who brought the
tidings a piece of meat from the public dining-table, as a present for
his good news, and nothing more. But now, when the news of this battle
reached Sparta, and Archidamus marched triumphantly into the town, all
their accustomed reserve broke down. His father was the first to meet
him, weeping for joy. After him came the senate, and the elders and
women flocked down to the river side, holding up their hands to heaven
and giving thanks to the gods for having put away the undeserved
reproach of Sparta, and having once more allowed her to raise her
head. It is said, indeed, that the Spartans before this battle were so
much ashamed of themselves, that they dared not even look their wives
in the face.

XXXIV. The independence of Messenia had been restored by Epameinondas,
and its former citizens collected together from all quarters of
Greece. The Lacedæmonians

æan captives was under discussion. After Epameinondas
had once laid out the reasons in support of his assertion, he might
then, if the same brief question were angrily put to him a second
time, meet it with another equally brief counter-question or retort.
It is this final interchange of thrusts which Plutarch has given,
omitting the arguments previously stated by Epameinondas, and
necessary to warrant the seeming paradox which he advances. We must
recollect that Epameinondas does not contend that Thebes was entitled
to _as much power_ in Bœotia as Sparta in Laconia. He only contends
that Bœotia, under the presidency of Thebes, was as much an integral
political aggregate, as Laconia under Sparta--in reference to the
Grecian world."--Grote's 'History of Greece,' part ii. ch. lxvii.]




LIFE OF POMPEIUS.


I. Towards Pompeius the Roman people seem to have been disposed from
the very first, just as the Prometheus of Aeschylus[189] was towards
his deliverer Hercules, when he says:--

     "Though hateful is the sire, most dear to me the son."

For neither did the Romans ever display hatred so violent and savage
towards any commander as towards Strabo[190] the father of Pompeius,
whom

n
his possession hunting nets and books which were taken among the
plunder at Asculum.[194] He received these things from his father when
he took Asculum, but he lost them after his return to Rome, when the
guards of Cinna broke into his house and plundered it. He had many
preliminary contests with the accuser before the trial commenced, in
which, by showing himself to possess an acuteness and firmness above
his years, he got great reputation and popularity, so that
Antistius,[195] who was prætor and presided at that trial, conceived a
great affection for Pompeius, and offered him his daughter to wife,
and spoke about it to his friends. Pompeius accepted the proposal, and
an agreement was secretly made between them; but yet the matter did
not fail to be generally known by reason of the partizanship of
Antistius. When at last Antistius declared the votes of the judices to
be for his acquittal, the people, as if a signal had been concerted,
called out the name Talasius,[196] which, pursuant to an old custom,
they are used to utter on the occasion of a marriage. This ancient
custom, they say, had the following origin: When the daughters of the
Sabines had come to Rome to see the games

and his
army standing by, admirable for the brave appearance of the men and
elated and rejoicing in their success, he leapt down from his horse,
and being addressed, according to custom, by the title of Imperator,
he addressed Pompeius in return by the title of Imperator, though
nobody would have expected that Sulla would give to a young man who
was not yet a member of the Senate, the title for which he was
fighting against the Scipios and the Marii. And indeed everything else
was in accordance with the first greeting, for Sulla used to rise from
his seat as Pompeius approached and take his vest from his head, which
he was not observed to do generally to any other person, though there
were many distinguished men about him. Pompeius, however, was not made
vain by these marks of distinction, but on being immediately sent into
Gaul by Sulla, where Metellus[203] commanded and appeared to be doing
nothing correspondent to his means, Pompeius said it was not right to
take the command from a man who was his senior and superior in
reputation; however he said he was ready to carry on the war in
conjunction with Metellus, if he had no objection, in obedience to his
orders and to give him his

t
stint and with readiness what they asked for. But as he admired
Pompeius for his superior merit and thought that he would be a great
support to his own interests, he was anxious in some way to attach him
by family relations. Metella, the wife of Sulla, had also the same
wish, and they persuaded Pompeius to put away Antistia and to take to
wife Aemilia, the step-daughter of Sulla, the child of Metella by
Scaurus, who was then living with her husband and was pregnant. This
matter of the marriage was of a tyrannical character, and more suited
to the interests of Sulla than conformable to the character of
Pompeius, for Aemilia, who was pregnant, was taken from another to be
married to him, and Antistia was put away with dishonour and under
lamentable circumstances, inasmuch as she had just lost her father
also, and that, too, on her husband's account; for Antistius was
murdered in the Senate-house because he was considered to be an
adherent of Sulla for the sake of Pompeius; and the mother of Antistia
having witnessed all this put an end to her life, so that this
misfortune was added to the tragedy of the marriage; and in sooth
another besides, for Aemilia herself died immediately af

even aided some in getting away. Pompeius had
determined to punish the inhabitants of Himera which had sided with
the enemy; but Sthenis the popular leader having asked for a
conference with him, told Pompeius that he would not do right, if he
let the guilty escape and punished the innocent. On Pompeius asking
who the guilty man was, Sthenis replied, it was himself, for he had
persuaded those citizens who were his friends, and forced those who
were his enemies. Pompeius admiring the bold speech and spirit of the
man pardoned him first and then all the rest. Hearing that his
soldiers were committing excesses on the march, he put a seal on their
swords, and he who broke the seal was punished.

XI. While he was thus engaged in Sicily and settling the civil
administration, he received a decree of the Senate and letters from
Sulla which contained an order for him to sail to Libya and vigorously
oppose Domitius,[209] who had got together a power much larger than
that with which Marius no long time back had passed over from Libya to
Italy and put all affairs at Rome in confusion by making himself a
tyrant after having been a fugitive. Accordingly making his
preparations with all haste Po

ade haste to
outdo them. Accordingly he advanced and met Pompeius, and receiving
him with all possible expressions of good-will, he saluted him with a
loud voice by the name of Magnus,[213] and he bade those who were
present to address him in the same way. The word Magnus means Great.
Others say that it was in Libya first that the whole army with
acclamation pronounced the name, and that it obtained strength and
currency by being confirmed by Sulla. But Pompeius himself, after
everybody else, and some time later when he was sent into Iberia as
proconsul against Sertorius, began to call himself in his letters and
edicts Magnus Pompeius; for the name was no longer invidious when
people had been made familiar with it. And here one may justly admire
and respect the old Romans, who requited with such appellations and
titles not success in war and battles only, but honoured therewith
political services and merits also. Two men accordingly the people
proclaimed Maximi, which means the Greatest; Valerius,[214] because he
reconciled the senate to the people when there was a misunderstanding
between them; and Fabius Rullus,[215] because he ejected from the
senate certain rich persons the chi

ldren of freedmen who had been
enrolled in the list of senators.

XIV. After this Pompeius asked for a triumph, but Sulla opposed his
claim: for the law gives a triumph to a consul or to a prætor[216]
only, but to no one else. And this is the reason why the first Scipio,
after defeating the Carthaginians in greater and more important
contests in Iberia, did not ask for a triumph, for he was not consul,
nor yet prætor. Sulla considered that if Pompeius, who was not yet
well bearded, should enter the city in triumph, he who, by reason of
his age, was not yet a member of the senate, both his own office and
the honour given to Pompeius would be exposed to much obloquy. Sulla
made these remarks to Pompeius, to show that he did not intend to let
him have a triumph, but would resist him and check his ambition, if he
would not listen to reason. Pompeius, however, was not cowed, but he
told Sulla to reflect, that more men worship the rising than the
setting sun, intending him to understand that his own power was on the
increase, but that the power of Sulla was diminishing and fading away.
Sulla did not distinctly hear these words, but observing that those
who did hear them, by looks and ges

tures expressed their astonishment,
he asked what it was that Pompeius had said. When he heard what it
was, he was confounded at the boldness of Pompeius, and called out
twice, "Let him triumph!" Now many persons were annoyed, and expressed
their dissatisfaction at the triumph, on which Pompeius, wishing to
annoy them still more, it is said, made preparation for entering the
city in a car drawn by four elephants,[217] for he brought from Libya
many of the king's elephants that he had taken; but as the gate was
too narrow, he gave up his project and contented himself with horses.
The soldiers, who had not obtained as much as they expected, were
ready to make a disturbance and impede the triumph, but Pompeius said
that he cared not for it, and would rather give up the triumph than
humour them; whereupon Servilius,[218] a man of distinction, who had
made most opposition to the triumph of Pompeius, said, Now he
perceived that Pompeius was really Great and was worthy of the
triumph. It is also certain that he might then have been easily
admitted into the senate, if he had chosen; but he showed no eagerness
for it, seeking, as they say, reputation from what was unusual. For it
was nothin

disposed to Pompeius, for he left legacies to his other friends, and
made them his son's guardians, but he passed over Pompeius
altogether. But Pompeius took this very quietly, and behaved on the
occasion as a citizen should do; and accordingly, when Lepidus and
some others were putting impediments in the way of the body being
interred in the Field of Mars, and were not for allowing the funeral
to be public, Pompeius brought his aid, and gave to the interment both
splendour and security.

XVI. As soon as Sulla's death made his prophetic warnings manifest,
and Lepidus was attempting to put himself in Sulla's place, not by any
circuitous movement or contrivance, but by taking up arms forthwith,
and again stirring up and gathering round him the remnants of the
factions which had long been enfeebled and had escaped from Sulla; and
his colleague Catulus, to whom the most honest and soundest part of
the Senate and the people attached themselves, was the first of the
Romans of the day for reputation of temperance and integrity, but was
considered to be better adapted for the conduct of civil than of
military affairs, and circumstances themselves were calling for
Pompeius, he did not hesi

tate what course to take, but attaching
himself to the optimates,[220] he was appointed commander of a force
to oppose Lepidus, who had already stirred up a large part of Italy
and held with an army under the command of Brutus, Gaul within the
Alps. Now Pompeius easily defeated the rest whom he attacked, but at
Mutina[221] in Gaul he sat down for some time opposite to Brutus,
while Lepidus having hurried on to Rome and posted himself before the
walls was demanding a second consulship and terrifying the citizens
with a numerous army. But the alarm was ended by a letter from
Pompeius, who had brought the war to a fortunate issue without a
battle. For Brutus, whether it was that he gave up his force himself
or was betrayed by his army changing sides, surrendered his person to
Pompeius and with some horsemen as an escort retired to one of the
small towns near the Padus, where after the interval of a single day
he was put to death by Geminius, whom Pompeius sent to him; and
Pompeius was much blamed for this. For at the very commencement of the
affair of the army changing sides, he wrote to the Senate that
Brutus[222] had voluntarily surrendered, and he then sent another
letter in which

egular
battles and used to command a force of heavy-armed soldiers trained to
close fighting. Upon this Pompeius, who had an army under his command,
bestirred himself to be sent out to support Metellus; and though
Catulus ordered him to disband his force he would not obey, but kept
under arms in the neighbourhood of the city continually inventing
excuses, until the command was given to him on the proposal of Lucius
Philippus. It was on this occasion, as it is said, that some one in
the Senate asked Philippus with some surprise, if he thought that
Pompeius ought to be sent out as Proconsul,[224] and Philippus
replied, "Not as Proconsul, as I think, but in place of the Consuls,"
meaning that both the consuls of that year were good for nothing. I

XVIII. When Pompeius arrived in Iberia, as it usually happens with the
reputation of a new commander, he gave the people great hopes, and the
nations which were not firmly attached to the party of Sertorius began
to stir themselves and change sides; whereupon Sertorius gave vent to
arrogant expressions against Pompeius, and scoffingly said, he should
only need a cane and a whip for this youth, if he were not afraid of
that old woman, meaning

nd Metellus from that part of Iberia which was
under him, and they were compelled to fly to other provinces through
want of provisions.

XX. Pompeius having spent most of his own property and applied it to
the purposes of the war, demanded money of the senate, and said that
he would come to Italy with his army if they did not send it.
Lucullus, who was then consul, being at variance with Pompeius, and
intriguing to get the command in the Mithridatic war for himself,
bestirred himself to get money sent for fear of letting Pompeius have
a reason for leaving Sertorius, and attacking Mithridates, which he
wished to do, for Mithridates was considered to be an opponent whom it
would be an honour to oppose and easy to vanquish. In the meantime,
Sertorius[225] was assassinated by his friends, of whom Perpenna was
the chief leader, and he attempted to do what Sertorius had done,
having indeed the same troops and means, but not equal judgment for
the management of them. Now Pompeius immediately advanced against
Perpenna, and perceiving that he was floundering in his affairs, he
sent down ten cohorts into the plain, as a bait, and gave them orders
to disperse as if they were flying. When Perp

enna had attacked the
cohorts, and was engaged in the pursuit, Pompeius appeared in full
force, and joining battle, gave the enemy a complete defeat. Most of
the officers fell in the battle; but Perpenna was brought to Pompeius,
who ordered him to be put to death, in which he did not show any
ingratitude, nor that he had forgotten what had happened in Sicily, as
some say, but he displayed great prudence and a judgment that was
advantageous to the commonweal. For Perpenna, who had got possession
of the writings of Sertorins, offered to produce letters from the most
powerful men in Rome, who being desirous to disturb the present
settlement and to change the constitution, invited Sertorius to Italy.
Now Pompeius, apprehending that this might give rise to greater wars
than those which were just ended, put Perpenna to death, and burnt the
letters without even reading them.

XXI. After staying[226] long enough to extinguish the chief
disturbances, and to quiet and settle those affairs which were in the
most inflammatory state, he led his army back to Italy, and happened
to arrive at the time when the servile war[227] was at its height.
This was the reason why Crassus the commander urged

on the hazard of a
battle, which he gained, with the slaughter of twelve thousand three
hundred of the enemy. Fortune, however, in a manner adopted Pompeius
into this success also, for five thousand men who escaped from the
battle fell in his way, all of whom he destroyed, and he took the
opportunity of writing first to the senate, to say that Crassus indeed
had conquered the gladiators in a pitched battle, but he had pulled up
the war by the roots. And this was agreeable to the Romans to hear,
owing to their good-will towards Pompeius, and also to speak of. As to
Iberia and Sertorius, no one even in jest would have said that the
conquest was due to any one else than Pompeius. But though the man was
in such repute, and such expectations were entertained of him, there
was still some suspicion and fear that he would not disband his army,
but would make his way by arms and sovereign power straight to the
polity of Sulla. Accordingly, those who through fear ran to greet him
on the way, were as many as those who did it from good-will. But when
Pompeius had removed this suspicion also by declaring that he would
disband his army after the triumph, there still remained one subject
of repro

ach for those who envied him, that he attached himself more
to the people than to the senate, and that he had determined to
restore the authority of the tribunate, which Sulla had destroyed, and
to court the favour of the many, which was true. For there was nothing
for which the people were more madly passionate, and nothing which
they more desired, than to see that magistracy again, so that Pompeius
considered the opportunity for this political measure a great good
fortune, as he could not have found any other favour by which to
requite the good-will of the citizens, if another had anticipated him
in this.

XXII. Now after a second triumph[228] and the consulship were voted to
him, Pompeius was not for this reason considered an object of
admiration and a great man; but the people considered it a proof of
his distinction, that Crassus, though the richest of all who were
engaged in public life, and the most powerful speaker and the greatest
man, and though he despised Pompeius and everybody else, did not
venture to become a candidate for the consulship till he had applied
to Pompeius. Pompeius indeed was well pleased with this, as he had
long wished to have the opportunity of doing

some service and friendly
act to Crassus. According he readily accepted the advances of Crassus,
and in his address to the people he declared that he should be as
grateful to them for his colleague as for the consulship. However,
when they were elected consuls, they differed about everything, and
came into collision: in the senate Crassus had more weight, but among
the people the influence of Pompeius was great. For Pompeius restored
the tribunate[229] to the people, and he allowed the judicia to be
again transferred to the Equites by a law. But the most agreeable of
all spectacles was that which Pompeius exhibited to the people when he
personally solicited his discharge from service. It is the custom
among the Roman Equites[230] when they have served the time fixed by
law, to lead their horse into the Forum before the two men whom they
call Censors, and after mentioning each general and Imperator under
whom they have served, and giving an account of their service, they
receive their dismissal. Honours also and infamy are awarded according
to each man's conduct. Now on this occasion the Censors Gellius and
Lentulus were sitting in all their official dignity, and the Equites
who wer

utation for those who have gained
distinction in arms and are ill suited for civil equality; for such
men claim the first place in peace also, as in war, while those who
get less honour in war cannot submit to have no advantage in peace at
least. Wherefore when they meet in the Forum with the man who has been
distinguished in camps and triumphs, they humble him and cast him
down; but if a man renounces all pretensions to civil distinction and
withdraws, they maintain his military honours and power untouched by
envy. Facts soon showed this.

XXIV. Now the power of the pirates[232] had its beginning in Cilicia,
and at first its adventure was attended with hazard and sought
concealment, but it gained confidence and daring in the Mithridatic
war by lending itself to aid the king. Then, the Romans being engaged
in the civil wars about the gates of Rome, the sea was left destitute
of all protection, and this by degrees drew them on, and encouraged
them not to confine their attacks to those who navigated the sea, but
to ravage islands and maritime cities. And now men who were powerful
by wealth and of distinguished birth, and who claimed superior
education, began to embark on board pirati

. Besides this, Pompeius was empowered to choose fifteen
legati from the Senate who should command in particular parts, to take
from the treasuries and from the Publicani as much money as he
pleased, and two hundred ships, with full authority as to the number
and levying of the armed force and of the rowers for the vessels. When
these provisions of the law were read, the people received them with
exceeding great satisfaction, but the chief of the Senate and the most
powerful citizens considered that this unlimited and indefinite power
was indeed too great to be an object of envy, but was a matter for
alarm. Accordingly with the exception of Cæsar they opposed the law;
but Cæsar spoke in favour of it, though indeed he cared very little
for Pompeius, but from the beginning it was his plan to insinuate
himself into the popular favour and to gain over the people. But the
rest vehemently assailed Pompeius. One of the consuls who had observed
to him that if he emulated Romulus he would not escape the end of
Romulus, was near being killed by the people. When Catulus came
forward to speak against the law, the people out of respect were
silent for some time; but after he had spoken at lengt

the city by night, considering that he should make himself an
object of jealousy if the people met him and crowded about him. At
daybreak he came into public and sacrificed; and an assembly being
summoned he contrived to get many other things in addition to what had
been voted, and nearly doubled his armament. For he manned five
hundred ships, and one hundred and twenty thousand heavy-armed
soldiers and five thousand horse were raised. He chose out of the
senate twenty-four men who had held command and served the office of
prætor; and there were two quæstors. As the prices of provisions
immediately fell, it gave the people, who were well pleased to have
it, opportunity to say that the very name of Pompeius had put an end
to the war. However, by dividing the waters and the whole space of the
internal sea into thirteen parts and appointing a certain number of
ships and a commander for each, with his force, which was thus
dispersed in all directions, he surrounded the piratical vessels that
fell in his way in a body, and forthwith hunted them down and brought
them into port; but those who separated from one another before they
were taken and effected their escape, crowded from all pa

rts and made
their way to Cilicia as to a hive; and against them Pompeius himself
went with sixty of the best ships. But he did not sail against them
till he had completely cleared of the piratical vessels the Tyrrhenian
sea, the Libyan, and the seas around Sardinia, and Corsica, and
Sicily, in forty days in all, by his own unwearied exertions and the
active co-operation of his commanders.

XXVII. In Rome the consul Piso, through passion and envy, was damaging
the preparations for the war, and disbanding the seamen who were to
man the ships, but Pompeius sent round his navy to Brundisium and
himself advanced through Tyrrhenia to Rome. On hearing this all the
people poured forth out of the city upon the road, just as if they had
not only a few days before conducted him out of the city. And the
rejoicing was caused by the speediness of the change, which was
contrary to expectation, for the Forum had a superabundance of
provisions. The consequence was that Piso ran the risk of being
deprived of the consulship, for Gabinius had already a law drawn up.
But Pompeius prevented this, and having managed everything else with
moderation and got what he wanted, he went down to Brundisium and s

s however did not give in, but he took and punished the
pirates, and after insulting and abusing Octavius in his camp he let
him go.

XXX. When news reached Rome that the Pirates' war was at an end and
that Pompeius being now at leisure was visiting the cities,
Manlius,[248] one of the tribunes, proposed a law, that Pompeius
should take all the country and force which Lucullus commanded, with
the addition of Bithynia, which Glabrio[249] had, and should carry on
the war against the kings Mithridates and Tigranes, with both the
naval force and the dominion of the sea on the terms on which he
received it originally. This was in short for the Roman dominion to be
placed at the disposal of one man. For the provinces which alone he
could not touch under the former law, Phrygia, Lycaonia, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Cilicia, the upper Colchis, Armenia, these he now had
together with the armies and resources with which Lucullus defeated
Mithridates and Tigranes. But though Lucullus was thus deprived of the
glory of his achievements and was receiving a successor in a triumph
rather than in a war, the aristocratical party thought less of this,
though they considered that the man was treated unjustl

y and
ungratefully, but they were much dissatisfied with the power of
Pompeius which they viewed as the setting up of a tyranny, and they
severally exhorted and encouraged one another to oppose the law and
not to give up their freedom. But when the time came, the rest kept
back through fear of the people and were silent, except Catulus, who
after finding much fault with the law and the tribune, yet without
persuading any one, urged the Senate from the Rostra, repeating it
many times, to seek for a mountain,[250] like their ancestors, and a
rock, to which they might fly for refuge and preserve their liberty.
Accordingly the law was ratified, as they say, by all the tribes[251]
and Pompeius in his absence was put in possession of nearly
everything which Sulla got after he had made himself master of the
city by arms and war. On receiving the letters and reading the decrees
in the presence of his friends who were congratulating him, Pompeius
is said to have contracted his eyebrows and to have struck his thigh,
and to have spoken like a man who was already tired and averse to
command, "Oh, the endless toils, how much better it were to have been
one unknown to fame, if there shall never

with a
crown on his head and a wand in his hand, met them and asked where
they had left Demetrius and when he would arrive. Now the friends of
Cato fell a-laughing, but Cato exclaimed, "O wretched city," and
passed by without making further answer. However Pompeius himself made
Demetrius less an object of odium to others by submitting to his
caprices without complaint. For it is said that frequently when
Pompeius at entertainments was waiting for and receiving his guests,
Demetrius would already have taken his place at the table, reclining
with haughty air, and with his vest[291] over his ears hanging down.
Before he had returned to Rome, Demetrius had got possession of the
most agreeable places in the suburbs, and the finest pleasure-grounds
and costly gardens were called Demetrian; and yet up to his third
triumph Pompeius was lodged in a moderate and simple manner. But
afterwards when he was erecting for the Romans that beautiful and
far-famed theatre,[292] he built, what may be compared to the small
boat that is towed after a big vessel, close by a house more
magnificent than he had before; and yet even this was so far from
being such a building as to excite any jealousy that t

hed the thieves. After Pompeius had arranged and settled affairs
in those parts, he continued his march with more pomp. On arriving at
Mitylene[299] he gave the city its freedom for the sake of Theophanes,
and he witnessed the usual contest there among the poets, the sole
subject being his own exploits. Being pleased with the theatre he had
a sketch taken of it and a plan made, with the intention of making one
like it in Rome, but larger and more splendid. When he was in Rhodes,
he heard all the sophists and made each a present of a talent.
Poseidonius[300] put in writing the discourse which he read before
Pompeius in opposition to the rhetorician Hermagoras on the doctrine
of general invention. In Athens Pompeius behaved in like manner to the
philosophers, and after giving also to the city fifty talents towards
its restoration, he was in hopes to set foot in Italy with a
reputation above that of any man and to be received by his family with
the same eagerness that he had to see them. But the Dæmon[301] who
takes care always to mix some portion of ill with the great and
glorious good things which come from Fortune, had long been lurking on
the watch and preparing to make his return

more painful to him. For
during the absence of Pompeius his wife Mucia[302] had been
incontinent. Indeed while Pompeius was at a distance he treated the
report with contempt, but when he had come near to Italy, and had
examined the charge with more deliberation, as it seems, he sent her
notice of divorce, though neither then nor afterwards did he say for
what reason he put her away: but the reason is mentioned in Cicero's
letters.

XLIII. All kinds of reports about Pompeius preceded his arrival at
Rome, and there was great alarm, as it was supposed that he would
forthwith lead his army against the city and that a monarchy[303]
would be firmly established. Crassus taking his sons and his money
secretly got away from Rome, whether it was that he really was afraid,
or, what is more probable, he wished to give credibility to the
calumny and to strengthen the odium against Pompeius. As soon,
however, as Pompeius landed[304] in Italy, he summoned his soldiers to
an assembly,and after saying what was suitable to the occasion and
expressing his affectionate thanks to them, he bade them disperse
among their several cities and each go to his home, remembering to
meet again for his triumph.

The army being thus dispersed, and the
fact being generally known, a wonderful circumstance happened. For the
cities seeing Pompeius Magnus unarmed and advancing with a few
friends, as if he were returning from an ordinary journey, pouring
forth through good will and forming an escort brought him into Rome
with a larger force, so that if he had designed to make any change and
revolution at that time he would not have wanted the army which he had
disbanded.

XLIV. As the law did not allow a general to enter the city before his
triumph, Pompeius sent to the Senate to request they would put off the
consular elections and to grant him this favour, that he might in his
own person assist Piso in his canvass. As Cato opposed his request, he
did not attain his object. But Pompeius admiring Cato's boldness of
speech and the vigour which he alone openly displayed in behalf of the
law, desired in some way or other to gain the man; and as Cato had two
nieces, Pompeius wished to take one of them to wife and to marry the
other to his son. Cato saw his object, which he viewed as a way of
corrupting him and in a manner bribing him by a matrimonial alliance;
but his sister and wife took it ill that

to them their own strength, so Cæsar
being raised up through the power of Pompeius against the State,
overthrew and cast down the man by whose help he became strong against
others. And it was brought about thus. Immediately upon Lucullus
returning from Asia, where he had been treated with great contumely by
Pompeius, the Senate gave him a splendid reception, and when Pompeius
had arrived they urged Lucullus still more to take a part in public
affairs, for the purpose of limiting the credit of Pompeius. Though
Lucullus was in other matters now dull and chilled for all active
life, having given himself up to the pleasures of ease and the
enjoyment of wealth, yet he forthwith sprang up against Pompeius, and
by a vigorous attack got a victory over him with respect to the
arrangements of Lucullus that he had annulled, and had the advantage
in the Senate with the co-operation of Cato. Pompeius, defeated and
pressed on all sides, was compelled to fly to tribunes and to attach
himself to young men, of whom the most scandalous and the most daring,
Clodius, took up his cause, but threw him completely under the feet of
the people; and by making him inconsistently with his station
constantly f

requent the Forum and carrying him about, he used him for
the purpose of confirming everything that was said or proposed to
please and flatter the people. Further, he asked of Pompeius for his
reward, just as if he were not degrading him but were doing him a
service, and he afterwards got what he asked, the betrayal of
Cicero,[308] who was a friend of Pompeius and had served him in public
matters more than any one else. For when Cicero was in danger and
prayed for his aid, Pompeius would not even see him, but shut the
front door upon those who came on Cicero's part and went out by
another door. Cicero fearing the trial retired from Rome.

XLVII. At this time Cæsar[309] returned from his government and
undertook a political measure, which brought him the greatest
popularity for the present and power for the future, but did the
greatest damage to Pompeius and the State. For he became a candidate
for his first consulship; but seeing that while Crassus was at
variance with Pompeius, if he attached himself to one of them he would
have the other for his enemy, he applied himself to effect a
reconciliation between them, a thing which in other respects was fair
and useful to the State, but

two of the tribunes who were conducting
him were wounded. By these means they cleared the Forum of their
opponents and then carried the law about the distribution of lands.
The people being taken with this bait were now become tame and ready
to support any project of theirs, giving no trouble at all, but
silently voting for what was proposed to them. Accordingly the
regulations of Pompeius as to which he was at variance with Lucullus
were confirmed, and Cæsar received Gaul within and without the Alps
and the province of Illyricum for five years with four complete
legions; and it was settled that the consuls for the next year should
be Piso[310] the father-in-law of Cæsar, and Gabinius, who was the
most extravagant of the flatterers of Pompeius. While this was going
on, Bibulus shut himself up in his house and never went out for eight
months, the remainder of the period of his consulship, but he sent out
counter-edicts full of abuse and charges against both: Cato as if
inspired and under divine influence foretold in the Senate what would
happen to the city and to Pompeius; and Lucullus[311] renouncing
public life kept quiet, on the ground that his age disqualified him
for political

place and put to them the
following questions: "Who is Imperator unlimited? what man seeks
another man? who scratches his head[313] with one finger?" The people
like a Chorus trained to chant corresponding parts, while Clodius was
shaking his toga,[314] at every question with loud shouts replied,
"Pompeius."

XLIX. Now this also annoyed Pompeius, who was unaccustomed to be
abused and had no practice in this kind of warfare; but he was still
more vexed when he perceived that the Senate were pleased at the
insults offered to him and at his paying the penalty for his treachery
to Cicero. But when it happened that they came to blows in the Forum
and even proceeded so far as to wound one another, and a slave of
Clodius was detected in the crowd stealing through the bystanders up
to Pompeius with a dagger in his hand, Pompeius alleging these
proceedings as his excuse, and besides that, being afraid of the
insolence and abuse of Clodius, came no more into the Forum so long as
Clodius was in office, but kept to his house and was planning with his
friends how he could pacify the resentment of the Senate and the
nobles towards him. However he would not listen to Culleo,[315] who
advised him

to put away Julia and giving up the friendship of Cæsar to
pass over to the Senate, but he followed the advice of those who
recommended that Cicero[316] should be restored, who was the greatest
enemy of Clodius and most beloved by the Senate. Pompeius with a
strong party accompanied Cicero's brother who was going to make his
entreaty to the people, and after some wounds had been inflicted in
the Forum and some persons were killed, they got the advantage over
Clodius. Cicero returning to the city in pursuance of a law
immediately reconciled Pompeius to the Senate, and, by speaking in
favour of the law relating to grain,[317] in a manner again made
Pompeius master of all the land and sea that the Romans possessed.
For under his control were placed harbours, places of trade, the
disposal of produce, in a word, all the affairs of those who navigated
the sea and cultivated the land. But Clodius complained that the law
had not been made on account of the scarcity of grain, but that the
scarcity of grain was caused in order that the law might be passed,
and that Pompeius might again fan into a flame and recover his power,
which was as it were wasting away through his want of spirit. Other

s
explained this to have been a device of the consul Spinther, whose
object was to engage Pompeius in a higher official employment, that
himself might be sent out to support king Ptolemæus.[318] However
Canidius the tribune proposed a measure to the effect that Pompeius
without an army and with two lictors should go to bring about a
reconciliation between the Alexandrians and the king. And indeed it
was supposed that Pompeius was not displeased at the measure, but the
Senate rejected it on the specious pretext that they feared for the
safety of Pompeius. There were writings to be found scattered about
the Forum and near the Senate-house, to the effect that Ptolemæus
wished Pompeius to be given to him as general instead of Spinther. And
Timagenes[319] says that Ptolemæus without any reason and without
necessity had quitted Egypt and left it at the advice of Theophanes
who was planning profitable occupation for Pompeius and a subject for
a fresh command. But the villainy of Theophanes does not make this so
probable, as the character of Pompeius makes it improbable, for he had
no ambition of so mean and illiberal a kind.

L. Pompeius being appointed to look after the management and th

e
supply of corn, sent his deputies and friends to many places, and he
himself sailed to Sicily and Sardinia and Libya and collected grain.
When he was about to set sail, there was a violent wind on the sea,
and the masters of the ships were unwilling to put out, but Pompeius
embarking first and bidding them raise the anchor, cried, "It is
necessary to sail; there is no necessity to live." By such boldness
and zeal, and the help of good fortune, Pompeius filled the markets
with grain and the sea with ships, so that the superfluity of what he
got together sufficed even for those who were without, and there was
as from a spring an abundant overflowing for all.

LI. During this time the Celtic wars[320] raised Cæsar to great
distinction; and though he was considered to be a very long way from
Rome, and to be occupied with Belgæ and Suevi and Britanni, he
contrived, by his skilful management, without being perceived, in the
midst of the popular assemblies, and in the most important matters, to
frustrate the political measures of Pompeius. For Cæsar's military
force was like a body that invested him, and he was training it to
toil, and making it invincible and formidable, not to oppose

the
barbarians, but he was disciplining his men in these contests just as
if it were merely hunting wild beasts and pursuing them with dogs; and
in the meantime he was sending to Rome gold and silver, and the rest
of the spoil and wealth which he got in abundance from so many
enemies, and by tempting people there with gifts, and assisting ædiles
in their expenses, and generals and consuls and their wives, he was
gaining over many of them; so that when he had crossed the Alps and
was wintering in Luca, there was a great crowd of men and women who
vied with one another in their eagerness to visit him, besides two
hundred of the Senatorian class, among whom were Pompeius and Crassus;
and one hundred and twenty fasces of proconsuls and prætors were seen
at Cæsar's doors. Now, after filling all the rest with hopes and
money, he sent them off; but a compact was made between him and
Crassus and Pompeius, that they should be candidates for the
consulship, and that Cæsar should help them by sending many of his
soldiers to vote, and that as soon as they were elected, they should
secure for themselves the command of provinces and armies, and should
confirm Cæsar's provinces to him for another

of Cato, and lest, as he had all the Senate on his side, he
should draw away and change the minds of the sounder part of the
people, would not allow Domitius to come down into the Forum, but they
sent armed men and killed the linkbearer, who was advancing in front,
and put the rest to flight. Cato was the last to retreat, after being
wounded in the right arm while he was fighting in front of Domitius.
By such means they attained the consulship, nor did they conduct
themselves in it with more decency. First of all, while the people
were electing Cato prætor and giving their votes, Pompeius broke up
the assembly, alleging that the omens were not favourable; and they
had Vatinius[323] proclaimed in place of Cato by bribing the tribes.
In the next place they introduced measures by means of Trebonius,[324]
which gave to Cæsar, pursuant to the agreement, a second five years,
to Crassus[325] Syria and the Parthian expedition, but to Pompeius all
Libya, and both the provinces of Iberia and four legions, of which he
lent two to Cæsar at his request for the war in Gaul. Now Crassus went
out to his province, after giving up his consular functions; and
Pompeius opened his theatre,[326] and ga

on of a dictator more boldly, and Cato and his
partisans fearing that they should be forced to yield, determined to
let Pompeius have a certain legalized authority for the purpose of
diverting him from that pure tyrannical office. Bibulus, who was an
enemy of Pompeius, was the first to propose in the Senate to choose
Pompeius sole consul[330] and he said that the city would thus either
be relieved from the present disorder, or they would be slaves to the
best man among them. This opinion appeared strange from such a person,
when Cato rising for the purpose as it was expected of speaking
against Bibulus, as soon as there was silence, said that for his part
he would not have introduced the proposed measure, but as it was
introduced by another he advised that it should be adopted, for he
preferred any government to no government, and he thought that nobody
would administer affairs better than Pompeius at a time of such
disorder. The Senate accepted the proposal and passed a decree that
Pompeius if elected should be solo consul, and that if he wanted a
colleague, he might choose any person whom he approved of, but not
before two months had elapsed; and Pompeius being made consul on the

ld receive yearly a thousand
talents, out of which he was to feed and maintain his troops.

LVI. Cæsar's friends taking advantage of this, claimed some notice for
Cæsar also, who was fighting so many battles for the supremacy of
Rome; they said that he deserved either another consulship, or to have
a fresh period added to his command, during which no other should
supersede him and carry off the glory due to his labours, but that he
who had accomplished those things should hold the command and quietly
enjoy the honour. A debate arose on those subjects, on which Pompeius,
affecting to deprecate the odium against Cæsar out of regard to him,
said that he had letters of Cæsar, who was willing to have a
successor and to be relieved from service, but still Cæsar thought it
fair that he should be allowed to be a candidate for the consulship
though he was not at Rome. To this Cato made opposition, and said that
Cæsar ought to become a private person and lay down his arms, and then
get any favour that he could from the citizens; and when Pompeius did
not prosecute the debate, but submitted as if he were worsted, his
real opinions about Cæsar became more suspected. He also sent to Cæsar
and d

ble about that, "for in whatever part of Italy," he said, "I stamp
the earth with my foot, there will spring up forces both men and
horse."

LVIII. And now Cæsar also stuck to public affairs more vigorously,
himself keeping at no great distance from Italy, and continually
sending his soldiers to the city to attend the elections, and with
money insinuating himself into the favour of many of the magistrates
and corrupting them; among whom was Paulus[337] the consul who changed
sides for fifteen hundred talents, and Curio[338] the tribune who was
released by Cæsar from countless debts, and Marcus Antonius who
through friendship for Curio was involved in his obligations. Now it
was said that one of the centurions who had come from Cæsar, while
standing near the Senate-house and hearing that the Senate were
refusing to allow Cæsar a prolongation of his term of government, said
as he struck his hand on his sword, "But this will give it." And all
that was doing and preparing had this design in view. Yet the claims
and reasons urged by Curio in favour of Cæsar were of a more
constitutional character. For he asked one of two things, either that
they should require Pompeius also to give up h

is force, or they should
not take Cæsar's troops from him: he said, "Whether they become
private persons on fair terms or continued a match for one another by
each keeping what he had, they would remain quiet; but he who proposed
to weaken one of them would double the power which he feared." Upon
this Marcellus the consul called Cæsar a robber, and urged the Senate
to vote him an enemy, if he should not lay down his arms. Yet Curio
with the assistance of Antonius and Piso, prevailed so far as to have
it put to a regular vote. Accordingly he proposed that those senators
should move off to one side who were in favour of Cæsar alone laying
down his arms and Pompeius remaining in command; and the majority went
over to that side. Again, upon his proposing that all should withdraw
who were of opinion that both should lay down their arms and that
neither should hold a command, only two-and-twenty were in favour of
Pompeius, and all the rest were on the side of Curio. Curio
considering that he had gained his point, rushed forth to the people
exulting with delight, and the people received him with clapping of
hands and threw on him chaplets and flowers. Pompeius was not in the
Senate, for t

hose who are in command of an army do not enter the city.
But Marcellus rose up and said that he would not sit still to listen
to words, but that as he spied ten legions already appearing in sight
above the Alps and on their march, he also would dispatch a man to
oppose them and to defend their country.

LIX. Upon this they changed their garments as was usual in a public
calamity. Marcellus[339] advanced to Pompeius through the Forum with
the Senate following him, and standing in front of him said, "I bid
you, Pompeius, defend your country and employ the forces that are in
readiness and raise others." Lentulus also said the same, who was one
of the consuls elect for the coming year. But when Pompeius began to
raise recruits, some refused and a few came together tardily and
without any readiness, but the greater part cried out that some terms
should be come to. For Antonius in spite of the Senate had read a
letter of Cæsar to the people which contained proposals likely to
conciliate the mass; for Cæsar proposed that both he and Pompeius
should give up their provinces and dismiss their troops, and so put
themselves in the hande of the people and render an account of what
they had don

e. Lentulus who was now consul would not assemble the
Senate; but Cicero who had just returned from Cilicia[340] attempted
an amicable settlement on the terms, that Cæsar should quit Gaul and
give up all his army except two legions with which he should hold
Illyricum and wait for his second consulship. As Pompeius was
dissatisfied with this, the friends of Cæsar so far yielded as to
agree that Cæsar should dismiss one of these two legions; but as
Lentulus made opposition and Cato called out that Pompeius was
blundering again if he allowed himself to be deceived, the attempt at
a settlement came to no conclusion.

LX. In the mean time intelligence arrived that Cæsar had taken
Ariminum,[341] a large city of Italy, and was marching straight upon
Rome with all his force. But this was false; for he was advancing with
only three hundred horsemen and five thousand legionary soldiers, and
he did not wait for the rest of his force which was beyond the Alps,
choosing to fall upon his enemies when they were in confusion and did
not expect him, rather than to give them time to prepare to fight with
him. Upon reaching the river Rubico, which was the boundary of his
province, he stood in silence

and lingered, reflecting, as we may
presume, on the magnitude of the risk. Then, like those who throw
themselves into a huge abyss from a precipice, closing the eyes of
calculation and wrapping himself up to meet the danger, he called out
in Greek to those who were present these words only, "Let the die be
cast," and took his army over. As soon as the report reached Rome, and
tumult and fear, such as were never known before, together with
consternation filled the city, the Senate immediately hurried in a
body to visit Pompeius, and the magistrates with them; but upon
Tullus[342] asking about an army and force, and Pompeius after some
delay saying in a tone of no great confidence, that he had the men in
readiness who had come from Cæsar, and he thought he should soon be
able to get together those who had been before enrolled to the number
of thirty thousand, Tullus cried aloud, "You have deceived us,
Pompeius," and he advised to send commissioners to Cæsar. One
Favonius,[343] in other respects no bad man, but who with his
self-will and insolence often supposed that he was imitating the bold
language of Cato, bade Pompeius strike the ground with his foot and
call up the troops which

he promised. Pompeius mildly submitted to
this ill-timed sarcasm; and when Cato reminded him of what he had
originally predicted to him about Cæsar, Pompeius replied that what
Cato had said was in truth more prophetic, but what he had done was of
a more friendly character.

LXI. Cato advised that Pompeius should be appointed general Imperator,
adding, that it was the business of those who caused great mischief to
put an end to it. Cato immediately left the city for Sicily, for he
had obtained that island as his province; and of the rest each went to
the province which had been assigned to him by lot. But as nearly all
Italy was in commotion, the events that happened caused much
perplexity; for those who were out of Rome hurried from all parts and
crowded into the city, and the inhabitants of Rome hastened to leave
the city, which in such tempest and confusion was weak in available
means, but strong in insubordination and the difficulty that it caused
to the magistrates. For it was not possible to allay the fear, nor did
any one allow Pompeius to follow his own judgment, but in whatever way
a man was affected, whether by fear, grief or perplexity, he carried
it to Pompeius and fill

ed him with it; and opposite measures prevailed
in the same day, and it was impossible for Pompeius to get any true
intelligence about the enemy, because there were many who reported
anything that they chanced to hear, and were vexed if he did not
believe them. Under these circumstances after declaring by an edict
that he saw nothing but confusion, and bidding all the senators follow
him, and giving notice that he should consider all who stayed behind
as partisans of Cæsar, he left the city late in the evening; and the
consuls fled without even making the sacrifices which were usual
before wars. But even in the midst of danger Pompeius was fortunate in
the general affection of the people, for though many blamed the
generalship, there was not one who hated the general, but one might
have found that those who were not willing to leave Pompeius were more
numerous than those who left the city for the cause of liberty.

LXII. A few davs after, Cæsar entered and took possession of
Rome.[344] He behaved with moderation to all and pacified everybody,
except Metellus[345] one of the tribunes who attempted to hinder him
from taking money out of the treasury, on which Cæsar threatened him
wit

turned about and marched to Iberia with the design of gaining over
the troops there.

LXIV. During this time Pompeius got together a great force: his naval
power was completely irresistible, for the fighting ships were five
hundred, and the number of Liburnian vessels[350] and other small
craft was immense; the cavalry, the flower of the Romans and Italians,
was seven thousand, distinguished by family, and wealth and courage;
his infantry, which was a mixed body and required discipline, he
exercised in Berœa,[351] not sitting still lazily, but practising
himself in gymnastic exercises[352] as if he were still in the vigour
of his age. And it was a great motive to confidence, when men saw
Pompeius Magnus, who was now sixty years of age save two, exercising
himself among the infantry under arms, then mounting his horse and
drawing his sword without any trouble while his horse was galloping
and easily sheathing it again; and in the throwing of his spear
showing not only an exactness of aim, but a strength of arm in the
distance to which he sent it, which many of the young men could not
surpass. Both kings of nations and governors came to him; and of the
men of rank about him from Rome

there were sufficient to make up a
complete Senate.[353] There came also Labeo,[354] who left Cæsar
though he had been his friend and had served with him in Gaul; and
Brutus,[355] son of the Brutus who was put to death in Gaul, a man of
noble spirit who had never yet spoken to Pompeius or saluted him
because Pompeius had put his father to death, but now he took service
under him as the liberator of Rome. Cicero,[356] though he had both in
his writings and his speeches in the Senate recommended other
measures, was ashamed not to join those who were fighting in defence
of their country. There came also to Macedonia Tidius Sextius,[357] a
man of extreme old age, lame of one leg; and while others were
laughing and jeering, Pompeius on seeing him rose up and ran to meet
him, for he considered it a great testimony for men of advanced age
and feeble strength to choose danger with him in preference to safety.

LXV. A Senate being formed, upon the proposition of Cato they came to
a resolution to put no Roman to death except in battle, and not to
plunder any city that was subject to the Romans, which increased still
further the popularity of the party of Pompeius; for those who were
unconce

itary duties, and marches, and change of
position, and digging of trenches and building of walls, were not
efficient by reason of age and on this account were eager to come to
close fighting and to engage hand to hand. However, previous to the
last contest Pompeius had been able in some degree to draw his men
from their purpose by persuading them to keep quiet; but when Cæsar
after the battle was compelled by want of provisions to break up his
camp, and began his march into Thessaly through the country of the
Athamanes,[361] the confidence of the soldiers of Pompeius could no
longer be kept in check, and calling out that Cæsar was flying, some
were for following and pursuing him, and others for crossing over into
Italy, and others were sending to Rome their slaves and friends to get
possession of houses near the Forum, with the intention of forthwith
becoming candidates for office. Many of their own accord sailed to
Cornelia who was in Lesbos bearing the good tidings of the war being
at an end; for Pompeius had sent her there out of the way of danger.
The Senate being assembled, Afranius gave his opinion that they should
stick to Italy, for Italy was the chief prize of the war, and

would
bring to those who were masters of it the possession of Sicily,
Sardinia, Corsica, Iberia, and all Gaul; and as to that which was the
greatest concern to Pompeius, his native country who was stretching
out her hands only at a short distance from them, it was not
honourable to leave her to be insulted and enslaved by slaves and
flatterers of tyrants. But Pompeius did not consider it to be
consistent with his reputation to run away from Cæsar a second time
and to be pursued, when fortune gave him the opportunity of being the
pursuer, nor did he think it consistent with his duty to desert
Scipio[362] and the consular men in Hellas and Thessaly who would
immediately fall into Cæsar's hands with their military chests and
large forces; he thought also that Rome was best cared for by fighting
in her defence as far from her as possible, that she might wait for
the conqueror without feeling or hearing of any misfortunes.

LXVII. Having come to this decision, Pompeius pursued Cæsar, resolved
to avoid a battle, but by following close up to hem him in and wear
him out by privation. He had other reasons for thinking this to be the
best plan, and it also reached his ears that it was a sub

ject of
common conversation among the cavalry that they ought to defeat Cæsar
as soon as they could and then put down Pompeius also. Some say that
this was also the reason why Pompeius employed Cato[363] in no matter
of importance, but even when he was marching against Cæsar left him on
the coast to look after the stores, through fear that if Cæsar were
destroyed, Cato might forthwith compel him also to lay down his
command. Accordingly as he followed the enemy leisurely he was much
censured and there was a clamour against him, that his object was not
to defeat Cæsar by his generalship, but his native country and the
Senate, that he might always keep the command and never give over
having as his attendants and guards those who considered themselves
the masters of the world. Domitius Ahenobarbus also by always calling
him Agamemnon and King of Kings made him odious. Favonius too made
himself no less disagreeable by his scoffing manner than others by the
unseasonable freedom of their language, calling out, "Men, we shall
not eat figs in Tusculum[364] even this year!" Lucius Afranius who had
lost his forces in Iberia and on that account had fallen under the
imputation of treachery, no

ompeius and Cæsar, whose name these nations heard of long before they
heard of the name of Rome? Such unsociable, and various, and savage
nations had they invaded and conquered. But now they engaged with one
another in battle, without even feeling any compunction about their
own glory, for which they spared not their native country, up to this
day having always borne the name of invincible. For the relationship
that had been made between them, and the charms of Julia, and that
marriage, were from the very first only deceitful and suspected
pledges of an alliance formed from interested motives, in which there
was not a particle of true friendship.

LXXI. Now when the plain of Pharsalus was filled with men and horses
and arms, and the signal for battle was raised on both sides, the
first to spring forward from the line of Cæsar was Caius
Crassianus[376] a centurion who had the command of one hundred and
twenty men, and was now fulfilling a great promise to Cæsar. For as
Cæsar observed him to be the first that was quitting the camp, he
spoke to him and asked what he thought of the battle; and Crassianus
stretching out his right hand replied with a loud voice, "You shall
have a splendi

ompeius might have questioned him about Providence, and Kratippus
might have shown that the state of affairs at Rome required a monarchy
on account of the political disorder; and he might have asked
Pompeius, "How, Pompeius, and by what evidence shall we be persuaded
that you would have used your fortune better than Cæsar, if you had
been victorious?" But these matters that concern the gods we must
leave as they are.

LXXVI. Taking on board his wife and friends, Pompeius continued his
voyage, only putting in at such ports as of necessity he must for
water or provisions. The first city that he came to was Attaleia[385]
of Pamphylia; and there some galleys from Cilicia met him, and some
soldiers were collecting, and there were again about sixty senators
about him. Hearing that his navy still kept together, and that Cato
had recruited many soldiers and was passing over to Libya, he lamented
to his friends and blamed himself for being forced to engage with his
army only, and for not making any use of the force which was beyond
all dispute superior to that of the enemy; and that his navy was not
so stationed that if he were defeated by land he might forthwith have
had what would have ma

erable
state, the object of detestation; but Brutus Marcus, after he had
killed Cæsar and got the power in his hands, finding Theodotus in
Asia, put him to death with every circumstance of contumely. Cornelia
obtained the remains of Pompeius and had them carried to his Alban
villa and interred there.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 189: This line is from the Prometheus Loosed ([Greek:
luomenos] λυόμενος) of Aeschylus which is lost. Prometheus Bound
([Greek: desmôtês] δεσμώτης) is extant. Hermann is of opinion that the
Prometheus Loosed did not belong to the same Tetralogy as the
Prometheus Bound.]

[Footnote 190: The Gens to which Pompeius belonged was Plebeian. Cn.
Pompeius Strabo, the father of Pompeius Magnus, was consul B.C. 89.
Strabo, a name derived like many other Roman names from some personal
peculiarity, signifies one who squints, and it was borne by members of
other Roman Gentes also, as the Julia, and Fannia. It is said that the
father of Pompeius Magnus had a cook Menogenes, who was called Strabo,
and that the name was given to Cn. Pompeius because he resembled his
cook. However this may be, Cn. Pompeius adopted the name, and it
appears on his coins and in the Fasti. He had a b

his side all the young men of promise.

Antistius had been murdered in the Senate-house, by the order of the
consul, the younger Marius, who was then blockaded in Præneste. Q.
Mucius Scævola, the Pontifex, was murdered at the same time.
(Appianus, _Civil Wars_, i. 88.)]

[Footnote 206: His true name is Perperna. See the Life of Sertorius.]

[Footnote 207: Cn. Papirius Carbo was put to death, B.C. 82, in his
third consulship. Compare Appianus, _Civil Wars_, i. 96, and Life of
Sulla, c. 28, Notes. Valerius Maximus, ix. c. 13, gives the story of
his begging for a short respite, with some other particulars.]

[Footnote 208: Caius Oppius, an intimate friend of Cæsar. Some persons
believed that he was the author of the Books on the Alexandrine,
African, and Spanish campaigns, which are printed with the Gallic War
of Cæsar. (Suetonius, _Cæsar_, 56.) Hs wrote various biographies.
Oppius is often mentioned by Cicero. There is extant a letter of
Cicero to him _Ad Diversos_, xi. 29); but it is entitled in some
editions of Cicero 'To Appius.']

[Footnote 209: This was Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus, the father-in-law of
Cinna. He had been consul B.C. 96 with C. Cassius Longinus.]

[Footnote 210: C.

he
beasts of North Africa.]

[Footnote 213: Drumann discusses at some length the question as to the
time and occasion on which Pompeius received the appellation: those
who are curious may consult his work, _Geschichte Roms_, Pompeii, p.
335.]

[Footnote 214: M. Valerius Maximus, a brother of Publicola. The
allusion is to the secession of the Plebs to the Mons Sacer, B.C. 494,
which was followed by the institution of the Tribunitian office.
Cicero (Brutus, 14) mentions this Valerius, and the secession to the
Mons Sacer. See Livius, ii. 30.]

[Footnote 215: Q. Fabius Maximus Rullus, who was five times consul,
and for the last time in B.C. 295. (Livius, x. 22.) He was afterwards
Dictator and Censor. It was in his capacity of Censor that he ejected
these persons from the Senate, B.C. 304. Compare the Life of Fabius
Maximus, c. 1.]

[Footnote 216: Kaltwasser observes that it was not so much a law (lex)
as a usage: but Plutarch's words by no means imply that he thought
there was a Lex to this effect. Livius (xxxi. c. 20) states that only
a dictator, consul, or prætor could have a triumph. The claim of
Pompeius was an impudent demand: but he felt his power. The 'first
Scipio' is the elder

Africanus. See Life of Tiberius Gracchus, c. 1,
Notes.]

[Footnote 217: Plutarch may mean that Pompeius really attempted to
enter the gate in a chariot drawn by elephants, and finding that he
could not do it, he got out and mounted a chariot drawn by horses.
This is perhaps nearer the literal version of the passage, and agrees
better with Plinius (_N. H._ viii. 1).]

[Footnote 218: P. Servilius Vatia Isauricus, consul for B.C. 79.
Pompeius triumphed B.C. 81, or in the beginning of 80 B.C., the first
of the class of Equites who ever had this honour. The review of the
Equites, which is spoken of at the end of this chapter, is explained
by c. 22.]

[Footnote 219: Compare the Life of Sulla, c. 31, &c. Sulla died in the
consulship of M. Æmilius Lepidus and Q. Lutatius Catulus, B.C. 78.]

[Footnote 220: This is the Roman expression, which Plutarch has
rendered by [Greek: hoi aristoi] οἱ άριστοι. Compare Life of Tib.
Gracchus, c. 10.]

[Footnote 221: On the site of Modena. The events of the consulship of
Lepidus are very confused. Drumann observes (Pompeii, p. 345) that
Plutarch incorrectly tells the story as if Pompeius was not present at
the attack of Lepidus on Rome (Appianus, _Civil

dicia Publica eligible only out of the body of
Senators. That the Senators had acted corruptly in the administration
of justice, we have the authority of Cicero in one of his Verrine
orations (_In Verr._ A 1, 13 and 16). The measure for restoring the
Equites to a share in the judicial functions was proposed by the
prætor L. Aurelius Cotta, the uncle of C. Julius Cæsar, with the
approbation of Pompeius and Cæsar, who were now acting in concert. The
charges of corruption which Cotta made against the Senate are recorded
by Cicero (_In Verr._ iii. 96). The proposed law (rogatio), which was
carried, made the Judices eligible out of the Senators, Equites, and
Tribuni Ærarii, which three classes are mentioned by Cicero (_Ad
Atticum_, i. 16) as represented by the Judices who sat on the trial of
Clodius. The purity of the administration of justice was not hereby
improved. Cicero, on the occasion of the trial of Clodius, speaks of
all these classes having their dishonest representatives among the
judices.]

[Footnote 231: Compare the Life of Crassus, c. 12.

The remarks at the end of the chapter may be useful to some men who
would meddle with matters political, when their only training has b

&c.]

[Footnote 255: Probably a Greek woman, as we may infer from the name.
The king seems to have had a liking for Greek women.]

[Footnote 256: This is probably a corrupted name. It is Sinorega in
Appianus (_Mithridatic War_, c. 101). Coræs proposes Sinora. (Strabo,
p. 555.) The place is mentioned by Ammianus (quoted by Sintenis) under
the name of Sinhorium or Synorium. Strabo places Sinoria (as it is
written in Casaubon's text) on the borders of the Greater Armenia.]

[Footnote 257: Appianus (_Mithridatic War_, c. 101) describes the
course which Mithridates took in his flight. He spent the winter in
Dioscuri, as Appianus calls it, or Dioscurias on the east coast of the
Euxine; and afterwards entered the countries bordering on the Mæotis
or sea of Azoff. (Compare Strabo, p. 555.)]

[Footnote 258: He was the third son of Tigranes by the daughter of
Mithridates. The other two had been put to death by their father. The
young Tigranes appeared in the triumph of Pompeius at Rome and then
was put to death. (Appianus, _Mithridatic War_, c. 104, 5.)]

[Footnote 259: See the Life of Lucullus, c. 26, notes.]

[Footnote 260: Probably Artaxata is meant, for Appianus (c. 104) says
that Pompei

rated in Rome on the 19th of
December at this time. (Macrobius, _Sat._ i. 10; and the Life of
Sulla, c. 18.) It was accordingly in the winter of B.C. 66 that
Pompeius was in the mountains of the Caucasus. (Dion Cassius, 36. c.
36, 37.)]

[Footnote 267: I have kept the name Cyrnus, as it stands in the text
of Plutarch, though it is probably, an error of the transcribers. The
real name Cyrus could not be unknown to Plutarch. In the text of
Appianus (_Mithridatic War_, c. 103) the name is erroneously written
Cyrtus; in Dion Cassius, it is Cyrnus. The Cyrus, now the Cur, flows
from the higher regions of the Caucasus through Iberia and Albania,
and is joined by the Araxes, Aras, above the point where the united
stream enters the Caspian on the west coast. The twelve mouths are
mentioned by Appianus (c. 103). Compare Strabo, p. 491.]

[Footnote 268: In fact the Persians never subdued any of the mountain
tribes within the nominal limits of their dominions; and the Caucasus
was indeed not even within the nominal limits.

It is true that Alexander soon quitted Hyrkania, which lies on the
south-east coast of the Caspian; but when he was in Hyrkania he was
still a considerable distance from t

leave his master to receive them.]

[Footnote 292: Drumann (_Geschichte Roms_, Pompeii, p. 53) observes
that "Plutarch does not say that Pompeius built his house near his
theatre, but that he built it in addition to his theatre and at the
same time, as Donatus had perceived, De Urbe Roma, 3, 8, in Græv.
Thes. T. 3, p. 695." But Drumann is probably mistaken. There is no
great propriety in the word [Greek: epholkion] ἐφόλκιον unless the
house was near the theatre, and the word [Greek: paretektênato]
παρετεκτήνατο rather implies 'proximity,' than 'in addition to.'

This was the first permanent theatre that Rome had. It was built
partly on the model of that of Mitylene and it was opened in the year
B.C. 55. This magnificent theatre, which would accommodate 40,000
people, stood in the Campus Martius. It was built of stone with the
exception of the scena, and ornamented with statues, which were placed
there under the direction of Atticus, who was a man of taste. Augustus
embellished the theatre, and he removed thither the statue of
Pompeius, which up to that time had stood in the Curia where Cæsar was
murdered. The scena was burnt down in the time of Tiberius, who began
to rebuild it; bu

e of Cæsar, c. 14, as to the events
mentioned in this chapter and the following. Cæsar was consul B.C.
59.]

[Footnote 310: L. Calpurnius Piso and A. Gabinius were consuls B.C.
58, in the year in which Clodius was tribune and Cicero was exiled.]

[Footnote 311: As to this remark of Pompeius, compare the Life of
Lucullus, c. 38.]

[Footnote 312: Compare the Life of Cato, c. 34.]

[Footnote 313: A mark of an effeminate person. Compare the Life of
Cæsar, c. 4, which explains this passage.]

[Footnote 314: This event is told by Dion Cassius (39. c. 19), but as
Kaltwasser remarks he places it in B.C. 56, when Clodius was ædile and
Cn. Cornelius Lentulus Marcellinus and M. Marcius Philippus were
consuls. The trial was that of Milo De Vi, B.C. 56. Compare Cicero (Ad
Quintum Fratrem, ii. 3) and Rein (_Criminalrecht der Römer_, p. 758,
note).]

[Footnote 315: Q. Terentius Culleo was a tribunus plebis B.C. 58. He
is mentioned by Cicero (_Ad Attic._ iii. 15) and elsewhere.]

[Footnote 316: Cicero returned to Rome B.C. 57 in the consulship of P.
Cornelius Lentulus Spinther and Q. Cæcilius Metellus Nepos. See the
Life of Cicero, c. 33. He had returned to Rome before the trial
mentioned at the e

nd of c. 48.]

[Footnote 317: Pompeius was made Præfectus Annonæ for five years.
There was a great scarcity at Rome, which was nothing unusual, and
dangerous riots (see the article CORN TRADE, ROMAN, 'Political
Dictionary,' by the author of this note). The appointment of Pompeius
is mentioned by Dion Cassius (39. c. 9, and the notes of Reimarus).
Cicero (_Ad Atticum_, iv. 1) speaks of the appointment of Pompeius.]

[Footnote 318: Ptolemæus Auletes had given large bribes to several
Romans to purchase their influence and to get himself declared a
friend and ally of the Romans; which was in fact to put himself under
their protection. His subjects were dissatisfied with him for various
reasons, and among others for the heavy taxes which he laid on them to
raise the bribe money. He made his escape from Egypt and was now in
Rome. The story is told at some length in Dion Cassius (39. c. 12,
&c.), and the matter of the king's restoration is discussed by Cicero
in several letters (_Ad Diversos_, i. 1-7) to this Spinther. The king
for the present did not get the aid which he wanted, and he retired to
Ephesus, where he lodged within the precincts of the temple of
Artemis, which was an ASYLUM.

(See 'Political Dictionary,' art.
Asylum; and Strabo, p. 641.)]

[Footnote 319: A Greek historian of the time of Augustus. He was
originally a captive slave, but he was manumitted and admitted to the
intimacy of Augustus Cæsar. He was very free with his tongue, which at
last caused him to be forbidden the house of Augustus. (Seneca, _De
Ira_, iii. 23.) He burnt some of his historical writings, but not all
of them, for Plutarch here refers to his authority. Horatius (1 _Ep_.
19. v. 15) alludes to Timagenes. (See Suidas, [Greek: Timagenês]
Τιμαγένης.)]

[Footnote 320: See the Life of Cæsar, c. 15, and as to the conference
at Luca, c. 21. The conference took place B.C. 56, when Marcellinus
(c. 48, notes) was one of the consuls. Compare also the Life of
Crassus (c. 14, 15), and Dion Cassius, 39. c. 30, as to the trouble at
Rome at this time, and Appianus (_Civil Wars_, ii. 17).]

[Footnote 321: This is the meaning of the word [Greek: politikôteron]
πολιτικώτερον, which is generally mistranslated here and in other
parts of Plutarch. It is the translation of the Roman term
'civiliter.' (Tacitus, _Annal_. i 33, iii 76.)]

[Footnote 322: Life of Crassus, c. 15, notes.]

[Footnote 323: P.